taxon starts here.
1, Pithecellobium diversifolium Bentham, London J. Bot. 3: 201 (sub Pithecolabio).
1844, — "Province of Piauhy in Brazil, Gardner, n.
2554; Serra Jacobina [in Bahia], Blanchet, n.
2670."
— Syntypi, Mounted together on one sheet, K (hb. Bentham.)! = NY Neg. 2003; isosyntypi, BM!, NY!, P!. — Feuilleea diversifolia (Bentham) O. Kuntze, Revis.
Gen. Pl. 1; 187.
1891.
Pithecolobium diversifolium vat. microphylium Bentham in Martius, Fl. Bras. 18(2): 432, 1876. — "Habitat in iaundatis Lagadisso ad Rio S. Francisco provinciae Bahiensis: — Holotypus, M n.v.— Reduced to typical P. diversifotium by Lewis, 1987; 179.
P. diverstfolium sensu Bentham, 1875: 574; (876: 432, t. CXI; Pithecellobium diversifolium sensu Lewis, 1987: 178, fig. 11(A,B).
Stiffly branched arborescent shrubs attaining 5(—?) m, armed at al] nodes of long-shoots with stout, widely ascending, basally dilated stipular spines, the young stems and lf-axes pilosulous, either thiniy or densely, with straight widely spreading pallid hairs to 0.3-0.5 mum, the firmly papery, moderately bicolored !fts either pilosulous on both faces, or only beneath, or glabrousciliolate, the capituliform fl-spikes of cream-colored flowers arising solitary in axils of diminished or rudimentary lvs of slender brachyblasts.
Primary stipules 3-8 mm, persistent as stout spines along defoliate branches, those of fertile brachyblasts subulate or spinulose, <2 mm. i-ii/1-2(-3), some primary vs 12-16-foliolate but al] or most lvs associated with fls exactly 4-foliolate; lf-stks 1-7 mum, at middle 0,4-0.7 mm diam, the interpetiolar segment, when present, shorter that true petiole; a shortly stipitate nectary 0.3-0.5 diam between each pair of pinnae and at tip of each pinna-rachis; rachises of the one or the further pinna-pair 2-9(-14) mm; Lft-pulvinules 0.4-0.6 x 0,3-0.4 mm, scarcely wrinkled: Ifts when more than one pair distally accrescent, the blades inequilaterally obovate, elliptic-obovate, or rarely elliptic-ovate from shallowly semicordate base, at apex either emarginate, or obtuse, or obtuse-mucronulate, the larger ones 14— 21 x 8-12 mm, 1.4-1.8 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the gently porrect or almost straight, only slightly excentric midrib giving rise on each side to 3-S(-6) major and random intercalary secondary nerves, the former brochidodrome close within the plane margin, and sometimes to an open tertiary reticulum, the whole venation finely prominulous on both faces or only so beneath.
Peduncles 7-2X(-26) mm; capitula +10-20-fld, the receptacle +2-4 mm; bracts lanceolate or triangular-acuminate 0.8—1.5 mm, persistent; fls sessile, homemorphic, the perianth 5-merous, either pilosulous or silky-strigulose extemally, the corolfa often more densely so than the calyx; calyx campanulate, weakly 5-nerved, 1.4- 2.6 x mm, the low-triangular teeth 0.2-0.45 mm; corolla gently dilated upward 7-9 mm, 3-5 times as long as calyx, the erect, ovate lobes 1.3-2.5 x 0.8-1.2 mm; androecium 22-36-merous, 17-30 mm, the stemonozone 0.6-1 mm, the tube 7-9 mm, nearly as long as or slightly exserted from corolla, a little thickened internally at base but disc not developed; ovary linearellipsoid 1.3-2 mm, attenuate at base into a stipe 2.6-3 mm, at early anthesis glabrous but becoming minutely papillate or puberulent following fertilization.
Pods and seeds (few seen) apparently as in P. excelsum, the seed-aril whitish.
In caatinga thickets and spiny chaparral, mostly below 300 m, almost confined to the middle and lower basin of no S. Francisco in Bahia and perhaps adj. Minas Gerais, Brazil, extending feebly N through W Pemmambuco to the headwaters of rio Paraiba in SW Piaui, to be sought in Alagoas. — Map 1. — Fl. V-VII(—?), perhaps intermittently following rains. — Brinco de sauim.
Pithecellobium diversifolium is distinguished from P. exceisum as much by the immense geographic discontinuity between them as by any macromorphological divergence.
The leaf-formulae are the same, and both vary in pubescence of foliage, but P diversifotium has rather stouter and stiffer branches, shorter peduncles, and tends to have more numerous flowers to the capitulum., Whether they are directly related or independently derived from P. unguis-cati cannot be determined at present, and for this reason they are maintained as distinct species.
A taxon starts here.
2.
Pithecellobium excelsum Bentham, London J. Bot. 3: 201.
1844.
Inga excelsa Kunth, Mimoses 57, t. 18.
1820. — "Crescit in ripa MagGalenae [properly Marafién] fluminis, prope Tomependam [downstream from Choros, lat. +5°45'S in Cajamarca, prov. Jaén, Peru; cf. Sandwith, Bull. Misc.
Inf.
Kew 1926; 187], altitudine 200 hexapodarum [= 350 m]) (Provinicia Jaén de — Holotypus, Humboldt & Bonpland 3610, trom isotypus, P (hb. Bonpland.)!. — Feuilleea excelsa (Kunth) O. Kuntze, Revis.
Gen. Pl. 1: 187.
1891.
Macrophyilidious arborescent shrubs and severaltrunked treelets 2-8 m, armed at all nodes or at all beiow the slender, pliantly flexuous branch-tips with a pair of widely ascending, straight, pungent lignescent stipules, the young branches and lf-axes either villosulous with fine spreading white hairs to 0,1-0.4 mm or subglabrous, the papery, moderately bicolored Ifts either glabrous, or glabrous ciliolate, or pubescent beneath (sometimes with basal-posterior tuft) only, or pubescent on both faces, the lvs heteromorphic, the ampler lower ones (absent from some specimens) composed of more than 4 (but not more than Ifts, the small upper ones exactly 4-foliolate, the few-fld capitula solitary, arising either from the axil of primary lvs or (distally) from that of rudimentary lvs, then forming small, shortly exserted pseudoracemes.
Stipules at least at some nodes of long-shoots 2-12 mom, tapering from dilated base, but at many distal or floriferous nodes shorter or reduced to a conic point or subulate spinule, Lf-formuda i-ii/1-3, that of most distal lvs exactly i/1, the anterior lft of first pair of plurifoliotate pinnae sometimes wanting; lf-stks (1.5-)2- 40 x 0.4-0.7 mm, openly shallow-sulcate ventrally, the one (or further of two) interfoliolar segment, when present, either a little longer or shorter than petiole proper, a cometor trumpet-shaped, stipitate nectary 0.3-0.7 mm diam at tip of each lf-stk and each pinnarachis, and often between each proximal pinnaor Iftpair; rachises of the one or the longer of 2 pinna-pairs (1.5-)2.5-30 mm, sometimes of slightly unequal Jength or vigor, when more than 2-foliolate the further interpinnal segment longest; Ift-pulvimules (1.6) x 0.3-0.7 mm, weakly wrinkled; Ifts variable according to position on branchlet, those of plurifoliolate pinnae strongly accrescent, those of primary lvs proportionately ampler than those of lvs associated with a peduncle, all broadly obovate or obovateelliptic from inequilaterally cordate or semicordate base, at apex obtuse muticous, or obtuse mucronulate, or shallowly retuse, the distal pair 15-42 x 8-31 mm, 1.1-1.75 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the only slightly excentric, straight or gently incurved and often subflexuous midrib giving rise on each side to (3-)4-6 major (and few weak intercalary) secondary nerves brochidodrome well within the plane scurely undulate) margin, and these in turn to a variably developed 3—4-nary reticulum of veinlets, the whole venation at maturity usually prominulous on both faces, sometimes obscurely so on upper face.
Pedunctes very slender, the earlier ones 2-6.5 cm, some toward apex of some branchlets shorter; capitula 5—-12(-13)-fld, the abovoid receptacle 1-2.5 mm (rarely one fl downwardly displaced onto peduncle); bracts triangular-ovate-acuminulate 0.4-0.7 mm, persistent; fls sessile homomorphic, the perianth 5- merous, externally either subglabrous or minutely silky-strigulose or -pilosulous overall, the corolla greenish or pinkish, the androecium white; calyx campanulate, submembranous faintly S-nerved, 1.4— 2.3 x 1-13 mm, the teeth 0.1-0.3 mm; corolla narrowly tumpet-shaped 7.3-10 mm, the erect ovate lobes ].
4—2.6 x 0.9-1.3 mm; androecium 18-23 mm, the stemonozane 06-1 mm, the tube 7-8.5 mm, nearly as long as or a trifle longer than corolla, internally at base thickened into low-conyex callosities 0.4-0.5 mm; ovary linear ellipsoid compressed 1.5-2.3 mm, contracted at base into a filiform stipe 2.6—4 mm, at anthesis glabrous, puberulent after fertilization.
Pods 1(-2) per capitulum, in profile undulately linear, evenly recurved through +A-2 circles, 6.5-11 x 0.8-1.1 cm, 8-13 (-14)-seeded, contracted at base into a stipe 3-6 mm, abruptly acute at apex, laterally compressed but domed over each seed, the ventral (outer) suture usually a little constricted between seeds, the dorsal suture evenly decurved, but the body often also horizontally twisted and therefore not forming a flattened spiral, the stiffly papery valves at first dark red, fuscous red, or nearly black, red within, not septiferous; dehiscence elastic, through both sutures, the valves recurved and twisted, exposing the subpersistent seeds; funicle tapelike at base, distally dilated into a scalloped, red, pink, or whitish aril enveloping at least % of the seed; seeds descending, plumply lentiform x x 3.5-5 mm, the crustaceous, lustrous black testa either smooth or minutely scrobiculate, closely investing the hard biconvex embryo, the nearly complete pleurogram +4-6 mm diam. In semideciduous thorn-scrub, thin woodland and cactus-chaparral, ranging from the upper limit of mangrove on the Pacific lowlands to 1250 m in arid interAndean valleys, flourishing in disturbed thickets, locally common in lowland SW Ecuador (Manabf, Guayas, El] Oro) and NW Peru (Tumbes, Lambayeque), in Peru extending E to the Marafién valley in Cajamarca. — Map 1. — Fl nearly year-long, except when drought-inhibited, the new fls often coeval with ald fruit. — Chaguero, vila de gaia, ufia de pava, zarcillo de mono, Pithecellobium excelsum closely resembles P unguis-cau, differing principally in the plurifoliolate leaves; the capitula are on the average fewer-flowered and the individual corolla is a trifle longer.
It is the only PitheceHobium known to occur in Pacific Ecuador or northern Peru, and is seldom misidentified.
A taxon starts here.
3.
Pithecellobium circinale Bentham, London J. Bot. 3: 201.
1844.
Mimosa circinalis Linnaeus, Sp. Pl, 517, 1753, — "Habitat in America calidiore [= Haiti, fide Urban, 1920, — Based on a drawing by Plumier in the Codex Boerhaavianus seen by Linnaeus in 1737 at Leiden in the herbarium of Boerhaave, later published by Johannes Burman, Pl. Amer. 1: 3, t. 5.
1755 (TL-2, 8069), the holotypus therefore the plate (copied from the original at Paris) at Leiden.
The record by Linnaeus of having studied Burman's copy of the Plumier drawing is illustrated incidentaily in a reproduction of a Linnaean manuscript by Polhill & Stearn, Taxon 25: 324.
1976 (Mimosa no. 4); the identification of the Plumier plate with P circinate is documented by Urban, Repert.
Spec. Noy.
Regni Veg. Beih.
5: 36.
1920. — Inga circinalis (Linnaeus) Willdenow, Sp. PL 4: 1023.
1805, Stiffly, diffusely branched, macrophyllidious, drought-deciduous, arborescent shrubs 1-4(—5) m, armed at all or most nodes with a pair of conical or slenderly tapering spinescent stipules, puberulent throughout cither with fine pallid, erect or forwardly incumbent hairs +0.1-0.25 mm, the paucifoliolate lvs bicolored, the stiff, prominently venulose, sharply mucronate Ifts darker green and often lustrous or glaucescent above, paler dull beneath, either glabrous or puberulent on both faces or glabrous above and dorsally puberulent over proximal anterior third of blade, the capitula of whitish fls arising either directly from coevai lf-axils or from variably condensed axillary branchlets toward the end of long-shoots, the erratically coiled fruits long persistent, often into anthesis of the second year.
Stipules either widely ascending or subhorizental, straight or obscurely recurved, sometimes all or mostly conic 1-2 mm but often, especially on long-shoots, all tapering and to 2-10 mm, persistent on old wood.
Lf-formula ili-3, but always in some longer pinnae the Ifts 2-3-jug; petioles (1.5-)2.5-15(-24) mm, openly grooved yentrally, not dilated upward; a cupular thick-rimmed nectary at tip of lf-stk either sessile or shortly stoutly stipitate, deum-shaped, or turbinate, 0.3-0.9 mm diam, in profile 0.25-0,8(-1.1) mm tall, a similar but smaller nectary at tip of each pinna-rachis, pinnae often of unequal iength, the rachis of the longer one 6-34 mm, the one or the further interfoliolar segment (3-)4-12 mm; Ift-pulvinules 0.51.1 x 0.35-0.7 mm, delicately wrinkled, lfts distally accrescent, in outline inequilaterally obovate or suborbicular from obliquely cuneate or postically shallow-cordate base, at apex broadly rounded or obscurely low-deltate and sharply mucronate by the stiffly excurrent midrib, the larger blades 10-33 x 7-30 mm, 1-1.5 times as long as wide, the terminal mucro (0.4-)0.7-2.5 mm; venation pinnate, the midrib subcentric or a little forwardly displaced, either straight or gently arched forward, giving rise on each side to 4-7 major and few random intercalary secondary nerves brochidodrome well within the plane, comeous-marginate, often shallowly undulate margin, and these in ourn to a reticulum of sinuous connecting nervules, the whole venation of the mature blade yeilowish and prominent on both faces.
Peduncles solitary (on some short-shoots crowded, but subtended by a rudimentary lf-stk and always 1 per node), always slender, (7-) 10-35(-40) mm; fls 12-26 per capitulum, sessile, homomorphic, usually crowded on a clavate or subspherical receptacle 1.5-3 mm, rarely (e.g..
Eyerdam 403, NY) shortly spicate on linear receptacle to 6-9 mm; bracts linear-spatulate or narrowly lanceolate 0.5-0.9 mm, persistent, perianth greenish white (brunnescent when dried), finely minutely puberulent overall; calyx campanulate 1.3- 2.1 x 0.8-1 mm, the triangular, often brownish teeth 0.1-0.35 mm; corolla subcylindric 4.6-6.6 mm, the erect ovate lobes 0.9-1.7 x 0.6-1 mm, androecium (16-)20-32-merous, (7-)8.5-14.5 mm, the stemonozone 0.7-0.9 mm, the tube 3.3-5 mm, lacking the basal callosities; ovary at anthesis usually glabrous or microscopically papillate becoming puberulent after fertilization, the permanently glabrous stipe 2.74 mm, 2-3 times as long as the narrowly oblong body; style a trifle longer than longest stamens, a little dilated at the stigma.
Pods 1-2 per capitulum, in profile undulately linear and either evenly recurved through +1-2 circles into an open ring or equivalently distorted, attenuate at base into a slender stipe, cuspidate at apex, when well fertilized 7-14 x 0.5-1 cm, 8-12- seeded, the inconspicuous sutures not raised to frame the valves amd only shaliowly strangulate between seeds, the leathery but flexible valves externally fuscous dull, minutely strigulose (finally glabrescent), intemally teddish brown and fissured lengthwise, lacking septa; dehiscence through both sutures, the valves separating and independently twisted to display the seeds pendulous on a spongy red arilliform funicle; seeds compressed-lentiform, in broad profile either nearly round or obscurely obtusangulate +4-6 x 3.5-5.5 mm, the hard testa lustrous black, either smooth or minutely rugulose, the pleurogram at middle of seed-face +2-4 x 2-3 mm.
In thickets on the coast and on interior plains and hills below 150 m, on Cabritos I. in Lago Enriquillo at -30 m, locally common in E Cuba (Guanténamo and vicinity) and W and SW Hispaniola, in all departments of Haiti and in prov. Independencia, Barahona, Azua, and Peravia of Dominican Republic. — Map 2. — FL.
IX-IV(-VHI).
Pithecetlobium circinate has the leaf-formula of the two preceding, distantly allopatric species, but differs by leaflets tipped with a spinulose excurrent midrib, Sympatric PR dulce and P unguis-cati have exactly 4 leaflets in all leaves and are readily separable by this character, The fruit is essentially that of P unguis-catt except on the average more slender, with smaller seeds.
A taxon starts here.
5, Pithecellobium cynodonticum Bameby & Grimes, sp. nov., F circinali (Linnaeus) Bentham arcte affinis, imprimis foliis abbreviatis, pinnarum rachi 1-5 (nec 6-34) mm usque longa nectario apicali destituta, foliolis majoribus 2-5 (nec 6-34) mm tantum longis, ulterius ramis primariis confertissime foliatis foliolisque nunc muticis nunc breviter (nec omnibus longe) mucronatis diversa; habitu, foliolis parvis, nectario pinmarum deficiente P. histricem (A. Richard) Bentham revocans, sed ab ea foliolorum numero (cujusque folii 4-8, nec exacte 4) necnon corolla puberula breviori 24,5 (nec 6-10) mm longa distantior. — HAITI Nord-Ouest: Presqu'Ile Nord-Ouest, 7 km al oeste de Anse Rouge en la carretera costera a Baie de Henne, 19°38'N, 73°56'W, alt. 40 m, 10 Jun 1985 (fr., few buds and faded fis.), 7.
Zanoni (with M. Mejia & R. Garcia) 35073. — Holotypus, JBSD 69564, isotypi, NY (2 sheets)!.
Fig. 2.
Stiffly virgately few-branched, densely microphyllons shrubs 1.5—2 m, armed at all nodes with a pair of widely ascending or subhorizontal, lignescent stipules, the young prowth densely puberulent throughout with erect pallid hairs to 0.1-0.15 mm, the primary lvs early shed and replaced at each node by a fascicle of 2-3 very small lvs and an occasional peduncle, the small firm plane Ifts bicolored, fuscous above, tan beneath.
Ssipuies of primary tapering from dilated base, 3-7 mm, those of brachyblasts subulate, <1 mm.
Lf-formuta i/1-2, of all primary and of many brachyblastic lvs if2, the lfts then 8 per If; lf-stks 1-2 mm, charged at apex with a subsessile pored nectary 0.3-0.4 mm diam; pinna-rachises 1-4.5(-S) mm, lacking nectary, the one interfoliolar segment (when present) 1-2.5 mm, l[fts obliquely obovate from postically rounded, antically cuneate base, either broadly obtuse and muticous ot (on same branchlet) abruptly produced into a spinulose mucro 0.2-0.5 mm, the blades of distal or only pair 2.5-6 x 2-4 mm, 1.2-2.5 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the subcentric, straight or gently incurved midrib giving rise on each side to 3-5 weakly brochidodrome, simple or almost simple secondary nerves, the whole nervation bluntly prominulous beneath, less so above.
Feduncles (few seen) solitary +5-8 mm; capitula 25-30(—?)-fld, the globose or clavate receptacle +2 mm; bracts linear-lanceolate 0.7-1 mm, persistent; fls (seen only in advanced bud and faded) sessile, homomorphic, the perianth puberulent overalt; calyx campanulate S-nerved 21.5 mm; corolla 4.5 mm, Pod, seeds, and red aril of PF. circinale.
On dry limestone of almost dog's-tooth type, in arid matorrai at +40 m, known only from the type locality on the S shore of Presqu' Ile Nord-Quest, Haiti. — Not mapped. — Fl. season uncertain (random fis in IV).
Pithecellobium cynodonticum tesembles P. hissrix in diminutive leaves crowded along stiffly branched stems with internodes shorter than stipules (Fig. 1, no. 0), and in loss of nectary at tip of each pinna, but differs in having two pairs of ieaflets in the more vigorous pinnae and, so far as known from one collection, smailer, puberulent flowers.
Geographically, it is remote from P. Aistrix but sympatric with P. circinate, It has the leaf-formuia of ?. circinale and the excurrent (but shorter) mucro of the leaflets, but has much smaller leaflets (to 2-5 mm long) and stiffer, very densely foliate stems that contribute to a distinct facies.
The epithet (from Gr. kyon, dog + odons, tooth) alludes to the habitat on dog's-tooth limestone.
A taxon starts here.
6.
Pithecellobium histrix (A. Richard) Bentham, Trans.
Linn. Soc. London 30: 573.
1875 ("Pithecolobium & in Hooker, Icon.
Pl. III, 12:1.
1168.
1876.
Inga histrix A. Richard, Hist. Phys.
Cuba, Pl. Vasc.
471.
1846. —". , , in ruderatis circa Cabana [= ? Diffusely branched microphyllous shrubs (0.5-) 0.75-2.5 m often sarmentose by stiffly flexuous longshoots, armed at each node with a pair of spinescent stipules often as long as or longer than the subtended if, either glabrous throughout or the young growth minutely pallid-puberutent with fine, forwardly incumbent hairs mm, the foliage bicolored, the always glabrous, firmly chartaceous Ifts lustrous dark above, paler brown and dull beneath, the capitula of glabrous (subglabrous), pink-stamened fls borne both in coeval lf-axils toward the end of new long-shoots or on condensed axillary short-shoots.
Stipules of primary lvs widely ascending, straight or gently curved outward, tapering to a vulnerant point, 3-11(—15) mmm, those of short-shoots acicular, scarcely over 1 mm. if-formula exactly i/1 (each If 4-foliolate); petioles mostly 1-5 mm, at middle 0.25-0.4 mm diam, shallowly grooved ventrally, but that of some lvs on brachyblasts obsolete or almost so; nectary at tip of lf-stk either bucket-shaped or slenderly stipitate, in profile 0.25-0.7 mm tall, the cupular head 0.15-0.35 (-0.5) mm diam, no nectary on pinna-rachis; pinnae equilong, the rachis 0.7-3 mm, sulcate like the petiole; Ift-pulvinules 0.2-0.3 x 0,15-0.3 mm, scarcely wrinkled; Ifts narrowly obovate, elliptic-obovate, or oblanceolate from shallowly semicordate base, 2.5- 8(-10) x 1.5-5(-6) mm, (1.5—)1.7-2.2 times as long as wide, at apex broadly rounded or exceptionally depressed-deltate but always muticous; venation pinnate, the straight or slightly incurved, sometimes sinuous midrib giving rise on each side to 3-6 secondary venules often connected by weak random tertiary veinlets, the whole venation usually coarsely prominulous on both faces, always so beneath.
Peduncles slender 7-32 mm; capitula 8-17-fld, the spherical or clavate receptacle 0.7-2 mm; bracts subulate, <i mm, persistent; fls sessile, homomorphic, usually glabrous externally but the corolla lobes striately nerved; calyx campanulate 1.2-2(-2.4) x 0.8-1.2 mm, the triangular or depressed-deltate teeth 0.2-0.4 mm; corolla only slightly dilated upward mm, the erect or narrowly ascending, ovate lobes often unequal, the longest 1-2.1 x 0.8-1.3 mm; androecium 26-42- merous, mm, the stemonozone 0.8-1.2 mm, the tube 6-9.5 mm, lacking basal callosities; ovary glabrous, narrowly oblong 1.6—1.8 mm, raised on a stipe 2-3.1 mm.
Pods essentially as in F circinale, when well fertilized 5-8 x 0.50.8 em, 8-10- seeded, either retrofalcate or spirally coiled through to 1% circles, the valves either glabrous or rarely puberulent; dehiscence, red aril, and lustrous black seeds of P. circinale.
On rocky flats and low hills in coppice and pineJand, sometimes on coastal dunes, below 70 m, endemic to the W-centr. Bahamas (Andros, S. Andros, New Providence, Great Exuma) and Cuba (Pinar del Rio E to NW Oriente). — Map 4. — Fl. III, VI-X, the complete cycle poorly documented.
The diminutive leaves of P all exactly quadrifoliolate and scarcely or not longer than the associated pairs of stipular spines, are characteristic and not duplicated in the Bahamas.
In Cuba, the foliage might be mistaken for that of Sphinga prehensilis, but this is very different in the usually recurved spines, extremely long flowers, and planacompressed straight pod of papery texture, In northwestem Haiti, P histrix is replaced by P. cynodonticum, different in 2-3- jugate leaflets of many pinnae, by the spinulose tip of the leaflets, and by the smaller flowers.
A possibly undescribed relative of P. histrix is known from sterile specimens & Pimentef 525, JBSD, NY) collected on Isla Beata off the southwest coast of Dominican Republic in 1985.
This has much the aspect and the small quadrifoliolate leaves of P histrix but peculiar pallid, basally dilated stipules in the axillary buds, Beata is remote from the known range of P. histrix.
A taxon starts here.
7.
Pithecellobium keyense Britton in Briaon & Rose, N. Amer. Fl. 23: 22.
1928. — "Nassau, New Providence; Bahamas, W. C. Coker 57."
— Holotypus, collected 20,V1.1903 (fr), NY!, — Pithecolobium keyense Britton ex Coker in Shattuck, Veg. Bahama [s. 255.
1905, nom. nud. Pitkecelfobium bahamense var. keyense (Britton) Morton ex Isely, Madrofio 21: 285, in nota.
1972, nomen, Macrophyllidious unarmed shrubs and trees (1.5—) 2-5.5(-7) m with often scabrously lenticellate branchlets, either glabrous throughout or glabrous except for thinly puberulent peduncles and minutely silky-strigulose perianth, the stiffly papery lvs always hairless, either concolorous or a little paler beneath, olivaceous mostly drying brown, the capitula of either whitish or reddish-, white-, sordid-, or roseatestamened fls bome solitary along the axis of efoliate (depauperately foliate) pseudoracemes arising from lf-axils of both coeval and annotinous branchlets, either immersed in foliage or shortly exserted.
Stipules either triangular-subulate, appressed to stem and <1 mm, a little thickened but never spinescent, or vestigial, or at some or most nodes obsolete.
Lf-formula either i/1 or if1-2, either all or most lvs exactly 4 foliolate, often some (never all) 6- or 8-foliolate, one or both pinnae 4-foliolate; petioles accrescent upward through the annua] stem growth, 1.5-17(-20) mm, the early ones (sometimes all) very short, all widely shallowly sulcate and 0.8-2.5 mm wide distally, most or all shorter than or barely equaling the pinnarachises; nectary at tip of lf-stks sessile or nearly so, cupular thick-rimmed, 0.7-1.5 mm diam, a similar, slightly smaller nectary at tip of each pinna-rachis; rachises of pinnae either of equal length or one longer, both as long as or in majority of lvs longer than the petiole, (0.7-)1-4(-6) cm: lfts equilong or the proximal pair smaller, all obovate, or oblanceolate, or oblance-elliptic from semicordate base, either broadly obtuse, or truncate-emarginate, or obtuse apiculate, the larger ones (3-)3.5-8.5(-9) x (1.3) 1,5—4.5(-7) cm, 1.1-2.4 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the subcentric or moderately displaced, either straight, gently incurved, or randomly flexuous midrib giving rise to 5-8 major (with few intercalary), ascending secondary nerves, brochidodrome weil within the slenderly corneaus, often loosely revolute margin, and these to many sinuous connecting and reticular venules, the whole venation bluntly prominulous on both faces of blade.
Pedunctes 14-7 cm; capitula the globose, clavate or linearclavate receptacle 1.5-7 mm; bracts ovate or subulate 0.3-0.8 mm, either deciduous or subpersistent; fls sessile, homomorphic, the 5-merous perianth either glabrous or puberulent externally; calyx campanulate 1.6-2.6(-2.8) x 1.1-1.7(-2) mm, the tiangularsubulate or depressed-deltate teeth 0.1-0.5 mm; corolla mm, the erect or ascending, ovate lobes ]—-2.2 x 1-1,3 mm; androecium 18-28- merous, mostly 10,5-15.5, rarely 17-20 mm, the stemonozone <1 mm, the tube (1.2-) 1.8-3.3(-3.5) mm, shorter than corolla; ovary glabrous, the stipe 1.1-2 mun, the oblong body 1,3-1.9(-2.2) mm, either a trifle longer or shorter than stipe.
Pods 1(-3) per capitulum, in profile undulately linear, when well fertilized 9-21 x 0.8-1.4 cm, 8-13-seeded, compressed but turgid, either falcately recurved through more or less half a circle, or coiled backward through 1—2 circles into a flat spiral, or equivalently randomly recurved and twisted, attenuate at base into a stipe, more abruptly cuspidate at apex, the coriaceous glabrous valves fuscous-red or nigrescent externally, dull, smooth or bluntly venvlose, after dehiscence stiffly pliant under pressure, reddish tan within; funicular aril usually red or pink, sometimes whitish pink-tinged, cupping the lower "4 of seed; seeds in broad profile either round or pyriform 6,5-9 x 5-7.3 mm, the hard black testa lustrous, the closed or narrowly interrupted pleurogram +3—5.5 x 2,5-4.5 mm.
At edge of hammocks, in coppice, in drought-decidueus scrub-woodland, and on dunes and coral reefs or dog's-tooth limestones along the shore, locally plentiful throughout the Bahama Is. from Bimini and Great Abaco SE to Inagua, Caicos and Turks Is., SW to the cays off the coast of Belize. — Map 5. — Fl. randomly throughout the year but most profusely IX—-IIL. — Black-bead; ram's horn.
Pithecellobium keyense may be distinguished in the field from sympatric forms of closely related P. unguis-cati by complete lack of stipular spines, but it is not so easily differentiated in the herbarium, as some flowering branches of P unguis-cati, such as are taken for specimens, are also unarmed.
When some or all leaves of P keyense have more than four leaflets, it is distinguished by this character, but quadrifeliolate leaves are not rare in the species.
In such cases, the relative lengths of petiole and pinna-rachis, the former Jonger in P. unguis-cati and shorter (or at least no longer) in P. keyense, a feature first stressed by Isely (1973: 113), are usually decisive.
Where the range of P keyense overlaps that of microphyllous P Aistrix there occur polymorphic populations that have been described as a distinct species, herein interpreted collectively as the hybrid P. xX bahamense.
A taxon starts here.
8.
Pithecellobium unguis-cati (Linnaeus) [Martius, Hort, Reg.
Monac.
188.
1829] Bentham, London J. Bot, 3: 200.
1844, Mimosa unguis-cati Linnaeus, Sp. Pl. 517.
1753. — "Habitat in Jamaica, Carib- — Based on a barren plant grown in Clifford's garden at Hartekamp, Netherlands, and on ptior descriptions by Sloane and Plukenet, these all presumed conspecific, but explicit lectotypification awaited. — Inga unguts-cati (Linnaeus) de Candolle, Prodr, 2: 436, 1825. — Feuilleea unguis-cati (Linnaeus) O, Kuntze, Revis.
Gen. Pl. 1: 184, 1891. —- Zygia unguis-cati (Linnaeus) Sudworth, U,S.D.A.
Div, Forest, Bull, 14: 248.
1897, Macrophyllidious, semior fully deciduous, arborescent shrubs and trees 1—-7(—10) m, the stiff, brown or fuscous branchlets randomly armed at nodes with spinescent stipules (but flowering branchlets often unarmed), either glabrous except for sometimes minutely puberulent fls or variably strigulose or pilosulous throughout, the exactly 4-foliate lvs dull olivaceous, a little paler beneath, the inflorescence composed of short, termina! or axillary, mostly efoliate pseudoracemes of capitula or short spikes, either immersed in foliage or shortly exserted.
Stipules when modified into spines either horizontal or widely ascending, 3-17 mm, but many or all compressedconical or subulate +0,5-1.5 mm, with indurate, more or less bumished tip, all nearly always long-persistent.
Ef-formula i/1; \f-stk of major lvs mm, at middle 0.4-0.9 mm diam, that of reduced upper lvs often shorter, the ventral sulcus shallow and open; a sessile or shortly stoutly stipitate, cupular thickvimmed nectary 0,3-0.8(-1.2) mm diam bome at tip of and a similar but smaller one between each pair of Ifts; rachis of pinnae (1.5-)3-16 mm, either linear or a little dilated distally; pulvinule of lits (0.4-)0.6-1.7 x 0.3-1.2 mm, wrinkled; Ifts variable in size and outline, asymmetrically obovate-suborbicular or obovate-elliptic to oblong-oblanceolate or -elliptic from inequilateral base, obtuse or shallowly emarginate (exceptionally apiculate), the longer ones (1.5-)1.7-5(-6) x 0.8-4.5 em, 1.1-2 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the only slightly excentric midrib forwardly incurved and giving rise on each side to (3-)4-7 secondary nerves brochidodrome well within the plane margin, and thence to sinuous tertiary and reticular venules either delicately prominulous on both faces or (especially in age) depressed on upper face and prominulous beneath.
Primary axis of pseudoracemes 1-13 cm; peduncles solitary (very exceptionally and randomly the lowest commonly subtended by stipules and a rudimentary lf-stk with nectary, some median ones by 3 bractlets, the uppermost by a single bract, the longest of any inflorescence 1-3 cm; capitula or spikes 8-23(-35)-fld, the receptacular axis 1-30(—35) mm; floral bracts ovate or lanceolate +0.7-1.2 mm, incurved, persistent; fls sessile homomorphic, the usually greenish perianth 5(-6)-merous, either glabrous, or silky-strigulose, or less commonly pilosulous, the filaments either white, or ochroleucous, or pink-tinged either throughout or only toward base and pallid distally (never dark redcalyx submembranous campanulate or turbinate-campanulate 1-2.6 x 0.8-2.6 mm, weakly or sharply 5-nerved, the depressed-deltate or triangular teeth 0.15-0.4 (-0.6) mm, corolla funne!-shaped usually 3-6.5(—7) mm, in NW Venezuela locally 7-9 mm, the ascending or seldom subrecurved lobes 0.7-1.8 mm, androecium (8-)9-19 mm, the stemonozone 0.65-1 mm, the tube (J.8-) 2-7.5 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous or jess often micropapillate, the stipe (0.4-)0.6-3 mm, the body (4.2-)1.4-2.4 mm.
Pod pendulons, in profile sinuously linear, recurved through circles and often also randomly twisted, compressed but plumply biconvex over seeds, when well fertilized (6-)7-17 (-20) x 0.7-1.4 om, (6-)7-12(-14)-seeded, attenuate at base, apiculate, the almost immersed sutures either shallowly or deeply recessed between seeds, the thinly fleshy, glabrous or strigulose-pilosulous, red or redbrown valves becoming dry, stiffly leathery, externally fuscous, the endocarp otange overall; dehiscence through both sutures, the valves gaping and coiling; arilloid funicle white, pink, or red, nidulating 4—%4 of the seed; seeds plumply lentiform or subreniform, in broad view 6-10 x S—8 mm, the testa crustaceous, lustrous black, the pleurogram subcircular.
In deciduous or semideciduous, seasonally dry woodland and scrub communities, from sea level to 550 (in Oaxaca reported from 1500) m, widely dispersed in tropical Mexico, Central America, West Indies and N South America, introduced elsewhere: in Mexico on the Pacific coast and foothilis from extreme SW Sonora to Chiapas and on the Gulf slope S from N Tamaulipas to Yucatén Peninsula, thence interruptedly SE to Panama; Bahama Is. S from Eleuthera; throughout the Greater and Lesser Antilles, but apparently rare in Cuba, only planted in Barbados; naturalized on the keys and the coast of SW peninsular Florida, and in Bermuda; in South America along the Caribbean coast and in the drier interior hill country from N Colombia across Venezuela to Trinidad and Tobago, known from S of the Orinoco by one collection from NE state of Bolivar; once collected in Guyana, perhaps only in cultivation. — Map 6. — Fl. most prolifically after rain, with new foliage, but sporadically at other times, and in N-centr. Venezuela often from leafless annotinous branches. — Conchi, guayacdn, mongollano, rotén, ufia-de-gato (Mexico and Central Ametica), cinazo (Hispaniola), black-bead, bread-and-cheese, crabpickle (former British colonies); platanito, taguapire (Venezuela).
We here adopt a broad definition of PF. unguts-cat, different ftom that of Bentham (1875: 573) insofar as FP. rosewm is excluded, but expanded in another direction to include 2 ablangum, and in effect coextensive with the definition proposed by McVangh (1987: 238, fig. 32).
It accommodates numerous segregates proposed by Britton, Harms, Pittier, and Standley, most of which were described either from a single collection or from few collections from one locality and have not been evaluated subsequently.
As now understcad, P unguis-can differs from P rosewn and P dulce in predominantly solitary peduncles, further from P. roseum in almost always shorter, always paler filaments, and further from A duce either in longer peduncles, or longer flowers, or glabrate perianth, or spicate flowers, or glabrous ovary, or by some combination of those features.
The pods and seeds of these three species are essentially alike, varying in each in width and vesbure, and with width in size of seeds, but not in any distinctive pattern.
Infraspecific variation in P. unguis-cati sens. lat. is complex.
Features that have been thought diagnostic, or that might yet appear to be so, turn out on analysis to be without exception independently variable, so that segregation of infraspecific taxa by a syndrome of characters has become more difficult, not less so, as herbarium material has accumulated.
The potential taxonomic characters and their dispersal within the species may be described as follows: a.
Stature.
Normally arborescent and amply leafy, the species is represented in barren habitats by iow shmbby, commonly microphyllidious populations.
These seem independently derived and collectively do not constitute a natural unit.
The so-called P. microphylin dominant along the desert coast of Venezuela is mimicked by xeromorphic populations on Puerto Rico (e.g..
Reiler 1005, 4602 NY, from Fajardo), on the Pacific lowlands in Mexico (e.g., Rose, Standley & Russell 13302, NY, US) and in El Salvador (e.g., Standley 20891, NY). b.
Armament.
As in other Ingeae with spinescent stipules, spiny branches of P. unguis-cati often give tise to unarmed flowering branchiects.
This pattem of variation was known to Linnaeus in cultivation and is prevalent in the wild.
However striking to the eye, armament offers no reliable taxonomic criteria. c. Pubescence.
The leaflets vary from glabrous to thinly pilosulous on the petiole only, and by intermediate states to softly pilosulous overall, while the perianth varies from glabrous overall co pilosulous overall, but is most commonly appressed-silky either overall or only on the lobes.
Leaflets wholly glabrous or glabrous except for a tuft of hairs in one basal angle of midrib are dominant in the species and universal in the West Indies.
Pubescent leaflets are commonest on the Pacific slope in North America and occasional in northern South America, Excessive value has been attached to leaf-pubescence not only in P but also in P roseum, for it is imperfectly correlated with other variable features and poorly so with dispersal.
McVaugh (1987; 240) has noted that glabrous and pubescent leaves occur in the same population in Nueva Galicia, and H. H, Smith, in a field-note on his number 698 (NY), records glabrous and pubescent leaves on the same plant, The perianth is generally more densely pubescent in continental North America than in the West Indies and becomes pilosulous, rather than strigulose, only on the Pacific coast, Variation in pubescence of the flowers is, however, continuous.
We regard P. seleri, P. paniculatun, and P. saxoswn as no more than variously pubescent analogues of glabrate P. oblongum, and collectively different from West Indian P. unguis-cati only in tendencies toward elongation of the raceme-axis and shortening of the filament-tube and stipe of ovary. d.
Unit of inflorescence.
The receptacular axis varies from very short, yielding a more or less hemispherical capitulum of close-packed florets, to distinctly elongate, giving rise to an ellipsoid capitulum, or to a spike with some proximal or sometimes all florets well separated.
Here again, transitional states are frequent, and even on Jamaica the receptacle varies from 1 to 8 mm in length, e. Calyx.
The calyx varies from shallowly to deeply campanulate or occasionally to turbinate-camPpanulate, but independently of other characters and randomly in range. f.
Corolia.
This varies in length from 3 to 7 mm.
Its lobes commonly remain erect through anthesis, but rarely curve outward.
Size of the corolla appears to be more or less stabilized in extensive populations, but as it fluctuates independently of other variable features its value was evidently overemphasized by Pittier. g. Androeciwn, This varies in total length, and independently cf total length in length of tube, which is proportionately shorter overall in Mexico and Central America (mostly 3 mm or less) than in the West Indies 3-7 mm), but randomly variable in Venezuela. h.
Gynoecium.
The ovary at anthesis varies from perfectly smooth to papillate under magnification (x40) or thinly minutely puberulent (especially beyond middle), and the papillae after fertilization often develop into trichomes.
Thus, an apparently glabrous ovary may give rise to a densely puberulent fruit.
Populations with pubescent leaves seem more likely than those with glabrous leaves to have puberulent ovaries, but this is not invariably true.
From our survey of the whole macromorphological variation in P unguis-cati sens, lat. we recognize these general geographic trends: (1) in Mexico, on both the Pacific and Gulf slopes, and in Central America, toward dorsally tufted or variably pubescent leaflet-blades, elongation of the capitulum into a spike, a relatively short filament tube, and short ovaty-stipe; (2) in the West Indies, to glabrous leaflets, condensed capitula, long filament tube, and relatively iong ovary-stipe; and (3) in Colombia and Venezuela perplexing arrays of these characters, which effectively preclude definition of taxa above the populational level.
The possibility that some of the variation recorded in PF. unguis-cati may be attributed to introgressive hybridization with sympatric P duice or P. roseum, or both, requires study in the field.
A taxon starts here.
9.
Pithecelloblum roseum (Vahl) Bameby & Grimes, comb. nov, Mimosa rosea Vahi, Eclog.
Amer, 3: 33, t. 25, 1807. — Typus infra sub var. roseo indicatur.
Arborescent shrubs attaining 10 m but commonly 2.5-8 m tall, randomly armed at nodes of sterile branches with straight, ascending or horizontal spinescent stipules but most fertile branchlets unarmed, the young stems and the lfand inflorescenceaxes glabrous to pilosulous with erect or incurved pallid hairs 0.15-0.4 mm, the ample, stiffly papery, concolorous lfts either (a) glabrous on both faces, or (b) glabrous except for tuft in anterior basal angle of midrib on dorsal side, or (c) pilosuious beneath only, especially along veins, or (d) finely pilosulous on both faces, the capitula of relatively long, red-stamened fls mostly geminate or fasciculate at nodes of axillary and terminal, either efoliate or depauperately foliate pseudoracemes, subtended by a bract, or by a rudimentary lf-stk with nectary, or by a small lf.
Stipuies of many or all cauline lvs subnlate 0.4-1.5 mm, with stiffly appressed, sometimes burnished tip, but in some forms all or mostly developed into stout, terete or ventrally flattened spines 3-27 mm. i/1, lf-stks of primary cauline lys 1.5-5.5 cm, of diminished lvs in the inflorescence (no further described) shorter; nectary at tip of lf-stk sessile or almost so, eupular thick-rimmed, round or broadly elliptic 0.5—-1.3 mm diam, and similar but somewhat smaller ones between each pair of Ifts; pinna-rachises distally dilated, shallowly openly sulcate ventrally, 3-15(—18) mm; shallowly wrinkled 1.2-2.6(-3) mm; lIfts variable in outline, sometimes on one branch, obliquely elliptic to ovateor lance-elliptic or incipiently rhombic-ovate from strongly asymmetric, half-rounded or semicordate base, obtuse or deltateapiculate, those of cauline lvs 4,5-10(-11,5) x (1.74) cm, 1.65-3 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the gently incurved midnib giving rise on each side to +6—10 major secondary nerves incurvedascending to anastomosis well within the plane margin and to an irregular reticulum of veinlets prominylous on both faces or only beneath.
Primary axis of efoliate pseudoracemes 6-20 cm; peduncles all or mostly 2-4-nate, but some peduncles at foliate nodes solitary, the longer ones of a fascicle 2-45(-60) mm; capitula 8-22-fld, the receptacle 1-7 mm; bracts ovate or lanceolate acute 0.5—1,2 mm, persistent; fls sessile or almost so, homomorphic, 5-merous, the perianth greenish often red-tinged or -tipped, finely silkystrigulose overall; calyx campanulate 1.8-3.4(-4) x 1.2-1,6(-1,.8) mm, the tube finely 5-nerved, the depressed-deltate teeth 0.15-0,5 mm; corolla slenderly funnel-form 6-10 mm, the ercct ovate lobes 1.2-2.4 (-2.8) mm; androecium 26—42(-57)-merous, 17-25 (-32) mm, the stemonozone mm, the nbe 5.5-10,5 mm, either little shorter than corolla or shottly exserted; stipe of ovary 1.6-3.5(—4.7) mm, the body 1.8-2.5 mm, at anthesis usually micropapillate and sometimes also puberulent, but sometimes glabrous.
Pod of P. unguis-cati, 9-12 mm wide at seeds, when well fertilized 7-12-seeded, the valves minutely puberulent overall or randomly glabrate, especially at middle of valves; seeds of P. unguis-cati.
A taxon starts here.
9a.
Pithecellobium roseum var. roseum.
Mimosa rosea Vahl, 1807, Lc., sens, str. — "Habitat in Cajenna [French Guiana, where not seen subsequently, probably a mistake for N Colombia] von Rohr.' — Holotypus, C! = F Neg. 2/869, plant at left only, —- inga rosea (Vahl) Steudel, Nomencl.
Bot. 1: 431.
1821.
Characters of the species, modified by key to vaneties.
In seasonally dry thickets, xeromorphic brushwoodland, and bnish-savanna, sometimes along intermittent streams, from sea level to +350 m, interruptedly dispersed in N South America from the shores of the Caribbean to +2°N in Brazil: locally abundant in lower valley of the Madalena and plains at foot of Sierra de Santa Marta in Colombia, and in Venezuela around the Maracaibo basin and E into edo.
Lara; along the coast of Venezuela between edos, Falc6n and Miranda replaced by var. glaucescens, but reappearing in dry woodland of N edo.
Bolfvar. and on both sides of the Dragon's Mouth in E edo.
Sucre and Trinidad; disjunct in the upper Rupununi valley in Guyana and on the upper Rfo Branco in N edo. do Roraima, Brazil. — Map 7, — Fi, primarily VII-I, occasionally throughout the year. — Buche colorado, chancdn, tiracé, tiracé rojo (Colombia); taguapire, yacure (Venezuela).
Pithecellobium roseum differs from P. unguis-cati in the relatively long flower and long, vivid red or red-purple filaments.
Contrary to Bentham (1875), we include without taxonomic rank forms with leaflets glabrous, glabrous except dorsally tufted, and pilosulous either beneath only or on both faces.
The pubescence forms have little correlation with dispersal, H. H. Smith noted glabrous and pubescent leaflets on one tree.
Of the synonyms listed under var. roseum, inga forfex corresponds with the glabrous phase, 7. panic- .wlata and pubescens with the pilosulous one, and Mimosa rosea subinermis with the feebly armed state.
Pittier contrasted P subgloboswm only with P oblongum, a variety of P. unguis-cati, and not with sympatric P roseum.
The type of F zuliaense Pittier was compared in memory with specimens identified at US as P. pubescens, from the protologue of which it was found to differ in stightly larger flowers.
The type of P. parviflorum is a drought-stressed specimen with few flowers, these at the low size limit for the species (calyx +2.5, corolla 6 mm), but certainly conspecific with other collections of P roseum from northern state of Bolivar.
A taxon starts here.
9b.
Pithecellobium roseum var. glaucescens (Pittier) Barmeby & Grimes, comb. et stat. nov. Pithecolobiwn glaucescens Pittier, Bol. Ci. Técn.
Mus. Com. Venez.
1: 48.
1926, —"[Venezuela.] E] Carenero, 15 m., Miranda .
.
. fl. Marzo 9, 1923 (Pittier — Holotypus, VEN n.v.; isotypus, US Characters of the species, modified by key to varieties.
In dry thickets on coastal hills and beaches below 70 m, locally plentiful along the shore of the Caribbean in Venezuela, from Falcén interruptedly E to Miranda, — Map 7, — FL I-VI. Except for the short peduncles and consequently narrow and dense pseudoracemes, P glaucescens seems inseparable from PF. rosewn, to which it is here subordinated.
Its range occupies a gap in that of typical P. resewm and coincides with that of smali-leaved P. unguis-cati, which has smaller flowers and shorter pallid filaments.
Some sterile stems of var. glaucescens ate armed with massive divaricate spinous stipules to 1.7 cm long. To one such specimen Britton attached in annotation an unpublished specific name, evidently superfluous since formidably armed and scarcely armed branches are now known from one locality (Puerto Cabello).
A taxon starts here.
10.
Pithecellobium dulce (Roxburgh) Bentham, London J, Bot. 3: 199 (sub Pithecolobio).
1844.
Mimosa dulcis Roxburgh, Pl. Coromandel 1(4): 67, pl. 99.
1798. —- "', .
. introduced [in E coastal India) from the Philippine Islands."
— Holotypus (Nielsen, 1979: 34): Roxburgh s.n..
K (hb. Bentham. via Trees potentially attaining 15-18 m, with one or several trunks to +3 dm dbh, when well grown with rounded crown and pliantly pendulous branchlets but fertile as a bushy treelet and in less favorable habitats Maturing at 2-3 m; stems randomly armed at nodes of long-shoots with pairs of stout ascending straight stipular spines but the stipules toward the inflorescence and those of axillary brachyblasts stiffly subulate and much shorter, the annotinous and older branches densely pallid-lenticellate, the hommotinous ones together with lf-axes densely pilosulous to glabrous but the inflorescence always more or less pilosulous with ascending or erect whitish hairs to 0.1-0.45 mm, the foliage olivaceous, moderately bicolored, the lvs of long-shoots relatively ample but diminished upward or reduced to a rudimentary petiole, the lfts either glabrous, or glabrous except for a tuft of hairs dorsally in posterior angle of midrib, or thinly to minutely strigulose beneath only er on both faces, the small dense subspherical capitula of whitish, greenish-ochroleucous or rarely pink-tinged fls bore, mostly fasciculate by 2-4 but some solitary, in either axillary or terminally paniculate pseudoracemes, these often appearing efoliate but each fascicle of peduncles usually subtended by a rudimentary lf-stk charged with a nectary.
Stipular spines potentially attaining 13 mm, but commonly much shorter, and stipules of many young branches subulate, scarcely indurate and <2 mm, many herbarium spms unarmed, Lf-formuta i/1, each If 4-foliate; lf-stk of lvs below the inflorescence mm, a little dilated distally and near apex (0.5-)0.6-1 mm diam; a subsessile or stoutly short-stipitate, thick-rimmed nectary 0.3-0.7(-0.8) mm tall and 0.4-0.7 mm diam at tip of each lf-stk and a similar one at tip of each pinna-rachis; Ifts obliquely elliptic, oblong-elliptic, or the largest obovateor ovate-elliptic, from inequilateraJ, cuneate to shallowly semicordate base, either obtuse, or obtuse mucronulate, or emarginate, the larger ones 23-56 x 9-32 mm, (1.5-)1.6-2.8(-3) times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the gently porrect, only slightly excentric midrib giving rise on each side to major (and random intercalary) secondary nerves, brochidedrome well within the plane margin, and these in turn to an irregular open mesh of tertiary venules, the whole venation usually low-prominulous on both faces.
Longer peduncies 4—- 20(-24) x (0,35-)0.4-0.6 mm; capitula (15-) 18-29- fld, the subspherical or shortly clavate receptacle 1-2.5 mm; fls either all bisexual or often many (ail) of a capitulum functionally staminate, all 5-merous or few random ones 6-merous, all homomorphic, the perianth finely densely gray-silky-puberulent overall, bracts oblong or spatulate 0.6—-1.3(-1,6) mm, persistent; calyx campanulate or mrbinate-campanulate (1.1-)1.3-2(-2,2) x 1-1.8 mm, the usually depresseddeltate, sometimes triangular teeth mm; corolla mm, the erect ovate lobes 0.7-1.6 x 0.7-1.1 mm; androecium (22-)26-42- merous, mm, the stemonozone 0.35- 0.5 mm, the tube (1-)1.4-3.2 (-3.5) mm, sometimes a trifle callous internally at base but lacking a true disc; avary stipitate, the stipe glabrous, that of bisexual fls mm, the linear-ellipsoid, densely minutely pilosulous or sometimes more thinly pilosulous body (1-)1.2-2.1 mm; style of fertile fls shortly exserted, scarcely dilated at the stigma, Pods usually solitary, sometimes 2-3 per capitulum, undulately linear and loosely decurved +1-2 circles to form an open ring or equivalently contorted, the body when well fertilized 8-12-seeded, shallowly or (where ovules abort) deeply constricted between seeds, measured along middle of valves 9-17.5 cm long and at each seed (7.5-)8-17(-21) mm diam, at maturity a little compressed but plumply biconvex at each seed, the reddish brown, green and red-cheeked, or bright rose-red, internally red-brown, thinly fleshy valves becoming stiffly papery and coarsely venulose, either thinly or densely pilosulous when young but often glabrate at early maturity; dehiscence through both sutures, the valves both recurving and coiling; seeds persistent after dehiscence, nidulated by the scalloped, white or reddish pink aril, plumply compressed-lentiform 7-13 x 6-11 x 2-4 mm, the hard black, lustrous but often minutely migulose or punctate testa 0.15-0.25 mm in section, closely investing the homy pallid embryo; germination cryptocotylar, the first 2 cophylls simply pinnate, bifoliolate, the third and subsequent !vs bipinnate 4-foliolate.
Evergreen or almost so, the lf-fall and lf-flush often overlapping; native in seasonally dry, brush or woodland communities in lowland E and W Mexico (S from Baja California Sur, Sonora, and Tamaulipas), Central America, inter-Andean Colombia, and W Venezuela, from sea level to +1550 m, but dispersed in early Spanish colonial times to West Indies, the Philippines, and tropical Asia, where extensively naturalized, and later planted and escaping to waste lots in subtropical Fiorida, Hawaiian Is., Guyana, E Brazil, and elsewhere, a common ornamental and shade tree in Latin America, where also grown for the edible seed-aril. — Map 8. — abundantly following rains, intermittently, as moisture permits, throughout the year. — Guammuichil, huamichil, pinsén (Mexico): guamo blanco, yacure (Venezuela); azabuche, dinde, ojito de Nena, payandé clavo (Colombia); gallinero (Central America and Colombia); ingd dulce (Cuba): guamé americano (Puerto Rico); acacia & bracelets, diabelle (French Antilles): bread-and-cheese (Guyana); for further vernacular names in the Americas see Safford, Contr, U.S, Natl. Herb. 9: 356.
1905; Standley, 1922: 393; and in the Old World: Zingg, Philippine J. Sci. 54: 250-252 (many local corruptions of guamtichil).
1934; Kostermans, 1954: 8. — Fumishes honey, gum, tanbark, used in folk medicine, and the aril eaten raw or in infusion.
Pithecellobium dutce is distinguished among species with 4-foliolate leaves and truly capitate flowers (receptacle at most 2.5 mm) by puberulentpilosulous, stipitate ovary.
The typical form is characterized by relatively short peduncles (to 4-12 mm) and wide pod (10-16, seldom —21 mm at the seeds), and is apparently native to Pacific Mexico, introduced in Asia, the West Indies, Florida, and elsewhere, In southern Mexico, Central America, and northwest South America the longer peduncle of each fascicle is commonly between 1 and 2 cm long and the pod is narrower, about 8-12 mm wide at the seeds.
These variations are not well correlated, and we have no certainty as to the native status of many collections.
Independently of these characters the foliage varies from glabrous to pubescent on one or both faces of the leaflets, with or without a dorsal tuft in the posterior angle of the midrib.
No differential character was given in the protologue of P littorale, which has long been synonymized with P duice.
Pittier tentatively distinguished P microcklamys by supposed differences in leaflet pubescence and small flower size, but these are ineffective in practice.
An anomalous flowering specimen from the upper Magdalena valley in Tolima, Colombia (Sandeman 5700, K) has foliage and individual flowers of P. duice, but the flowers are borne in oblong spikes (receptacle +9-11 mm) rather than in capitula.
Sandwith in annotation suggested that this might represent an undescribed species, but it is as plausibly interpreted as a taxonomically insignificant variant of P dufce, which is known from the same region in typical form.
A taxon starts here.
11, Pithecellobium peckii Blake, Contr. Gray Herb. U1, 52: 71.
1917, — "BRITISH HONDURAS: .
.
. without definite locality, 1905-07, M. E. Peck 738829" — Holotypus & paratypus, GH!; isoparaty pus (829, fragm. + photo), NY!.
Amply foliate slender trees attaining +10 m with trunk 1.5 dm dbh, armed at each node of the gray canaliculate pallid-lenticellate branches with a pair of stout ascending spinescent stipules, glabrous except for microscopic puberulence about some pinnapulvini and pulvinules and for (on dorsal face of ifts) a small tuft in anterior basal angle of midrib, the firmly chartaceous Ifts olivaceous subconcelorous sublustrous, the spikes of smal] white fragrant fls fasciculate in the axil of coeval lvs, immersed in foliage.
Stipules coarsely acicular or conical subterete, 2-5 mm, persistent at defoliate nodes.
Lf-formuta ti-v/7— 10; lf-stks 4.5-8.5 cm, the petiole !.
3-3,8 cm, at middle 0.6—-1.2 mm diam, the ventral groove bread and shallow, narrowly green-marginate, the one or the longer interpinnal segment 12-17 mm, nectary between gach pinna-pair cupular, thick-rimmed, 0.6-0.8 mm diam, elevated on a short obconic stipe, similar but smaller nectaries on some pinna-rachises between first to third furthest pairs of lfts; pinnae a little accrescent distally, the rachis of further pairs 4-7.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 6-7 mm; Ifts alternate at base of rachis, becoming opposite or nearly so distally, their pulvinules +0.5 x 0.5 mm, finely wrinkled, the blades except for longer terminal pair subequiform, elliptic or obscurely rhombic-elliptic from inequilateral, shallowly semicordate base, obtuse but often minutely muconulate, the larger ones 14-23 x 4-8 mm, 2.6-3.7 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the nearly centric, straight or gently incurved midrib giving rise on each side to 5-6 major secondary veins narrowly ascending to anastomosis well within the plane margin, the tertiary venulation weak and random, the whole venation prominulous on both faces or in age becoming immersed on upper.
Fi-spikes sessile, densely +35-50-fld, the axis 1.5- 3.5 cm, bracts ovate, abruptly acuminulate, 0.6-0.9 Im, persistent; fls homomorphic, serially maturing upward, the perianth 5-merous, thinly microscopically puberulent especially beyond middle; calyx shallowly campanulate or subhemispherica] 1.1-1.3 x 1-1.2 mm, the depressed-deltate teeth +0.2 mm; androecium 30-32-merous, 18-19 mm, the stemonozone mm, the tube 7,5-9 mm; disc 0; ovary oblong-ovoid, densely minutely puberulent overail, elevated on a stipe 0.2-0.3 mm, cuneately contracted into the style.
Pods (few seen) sessile, undulately linear or submoniliform attenuate at both ends, strongly decurved, compressed but turgidly convex over 10- [2 seeds, 11-17.5 x 1.2-1.7 x 0.8-1] cm, bordered (but not framed) by sutures +3 mm wide, the stiffly coriaceous valves when ripe externally fuscovs glabrate, reddish within, the seeds separated by incipient septa; dehiscence through both sutures, the valves feebly twisting: seeds 7.5-15 x 6-12 x 2-5 mm, with large aril, the seed-coat papery brittle, lustrous brown; pleurogram 0.
In riparian woodland, known only from Belize in lat. specifically on Pine Ridge and along Rfo Grande and Golden Stream in Toledo District. — Fl. XIJ-1(?). — Palo de espina, waika beans.
A taxon starts here.
12.
Pithecellobium bipinnatum L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46: 518, fig. 6(F_J).
1991. "
COSTA RICA.
Prov. of Guanacaste, 2 km southwest of La Cruz, 10 m, 11°4'N, 85°40'W .
.
.
29 January 1978, /Ronj Liesner 4631."
— Holotypus, K?; isotypi, MEXU, MO n.v.
Macrophyllidious trees attaining 8 m, armed at nodes with small ascending spinescent stipules, the young stems and inflorescence glabrous or almost so, the Ifts glabrous except for a tuft of hairs im posterior basal angle of midrib on dorsal face, the short spikes of fragrant white fls fasciculate in axils of contemporary lys.
Stipules straight, to 3 mm.
Lf-formula iif3—4; lf-stks +4.5-5.5 cm, the petiole and one interpinnal segment subequilong; nectary between each pinnapair described as but illustrated as shortly stipitate cupular [perhaps ice-cream-coneshaped was meant] +1 mm diam; rachis of distal pinnae +10.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments +14 mm; Ift-pulvinules <1 mm; Ifts a little accrescent distally, alternate at base of pinna, the blades elliptic or ovate-elliptic from slightly inequilateral base, the largest 434 x 20 mm, the subcentric midrib pinnately 5—7-nerved on each side, the venation prominulous on both faces.
Units of inflorescence loosely spiciform, sessile or almost so, the axis 3-4 cm; bracts +0.5 mm, persistent; calyx [described as ''cylindric," illustrated as campanulate] +1.2 mm; corolla yellow, 27.5 mm; androecium 30-40-merous, +23 mm, the tube 11-12 mm; ovary nearly sessile, glabrescent; intrastarninal nectary Fruit unknown. [n riparian wocdland at 16 m, known only from the type-locality in far NW Costa Riva (Guanacaste). — Not mapped. — Fl. I-II. The epithet is a lame choice for an American mimosoid, of which more than 99% are characterized by bipinnate leaves.
The word bipinnatus has, among botanists, the connotation of fwicepinsiate, but could be interpreted also as composed of two pinnae.
Here, however, the meaning is distorted into 2 superfluous synonym of bijugare.
A taxon starts here.
13, Pithecellobium lanceolatum (Willdenow) Bentham, London J. Bot. 5: 105 (sub Pithecofobio).
1846 — Inga lanceolata Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow, Sp. Pl. 4: 1005.
1806. —"Habitat in NovaBarcelonna [either Anzodtegui or nearby Sucre, Venezuela, as Kunth (Mimoses 49, t. 15.
1820) attributed it to: 'in regno Novae Andalusiae, prope — Holotypus, BWILLD /90/0, seen in microfiche!; isotypi, Humboldt & Bonpland 31, PHBK!, P (bb.
Bonpland.)!. — Mimosa lanceolata (Willdenow) Poiret, Encyl.
Suppl. 1: 37.
1810. — Note that McYaugh (1987: 235) considered the combination P. fanceolatum Bentham, 1846, improperly published, and only validated by Standley, 1922: 393.
Bentham, however, was emending an earlier paper, explicitly cited page for page, and stated of P fanceolaten that "it includes all my synonyms and stations except Vahi's [Mimosa Arborescent shrubs and trees potentially 9-16 (-20) m tall with trunk sometimes attaining 6 dm diam (commonly smaller), but often flowering when 1.5-3 m and in marginal habitats no taller, randomly armed with spinescent stipules (but many specimens seemingly unarmed), the annotinous branchiets densely pallid-lenticellate, the young growth together with most lf-axes and all inflorescence-axes densely or thinly puberulent or pilosulous with fine, spreading or subappressed, pallid hairs 0.1-0.45(-0.55) mm, the chartaceous Ifts olivaceous, a little paler beneath, usually glabrous or glabrous except for a cuft of hairs dorsally in anterior basal angle of midrib, occasionally ciliolate, or pubérulent on one or both faces, the mostly solitary, either dense or looser and elongating spikes of whitish, white-stamened, fragrant fis laterally and terminally pseudoracemose-paniculate, each peduncle (or pair of peduncles) subtended by a rudimentary bladeless lf-stk bearing a nectary, the whole inflorescence exserted from foliage or some early peduncles axillary to fully expanded lvs.
Stipules of many flowering branchlets firm but not spinescent, erect, subulate or compressed-conic +0.5-2 mm, those of some or all long-shoots widely spreadingascending, longer, and vulnerant, some attaining 15 mm.
Lf-formula i/1, the lfts exactly 4 per If, but lvs quite variable in dimensions according to habitat and position on the plant, the early lvs of vigorous longshoots largest, the distal ones often either abruptly or gradually reduced in size; nectary at tip of lf-stks sessile, shallow-patelliform or cupular, round or crumpled, thinor thick-rimmed, 0.7-1,6(-2.3) mm diam, and a similar nectary at tip of each pinnarachis; if-stks of most lvs 1-4,5(-5) cm, but shorter in some distal lvs, all shallowly concave ventrally but only a little widened upward; pinna-rachises 4-19 (+22) mm, distinctly dilated distally; Ift-pulvini 1.4— 2.5 x 1-1.6 mm, coarsely cross-wrinkled; Ifts inequilaterally elliptic or ovate-elliptic from broadly cuneate or semicordate base, obtuse or emarginate, sometimes obscurely bluntly acuminate, the larger ones 3.5-9.5(-14) x (1.2-)1.6-4(-4.5) cm, 1.7-2.8(-3.3) times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the subcentric and gently incurved or straight and diagonal midrib giving rise on each side to 6-11(-12) major and random intercalary secondary nerves, brochidodrome well within the plane margin, and these in turn to an irregular open reticulum of veinlets, the whole venation finely prominulous on both faces of blade and often pallidly discolored.
Peduncte and rachis of spikes together 4-15(-17) cm, the fls subhorizontal, Often a little accrescent upward along the spike and some smaller ones functionally staminate; bracts ovateor deltate-apiculate to linear-lanceolate, 0.3- 2.5(-2.8) mm, persistent; perianth 5-merous or randomly 3-6-merous, externally strigulose or silkyPilosulous overall, the corolla often a little more densely so than calyx; calyx campanulate, sametimes deeply so and sometimes a little constricted below the teeth, (0.8-)1-3,8 x 0.8-1.5(-1.9) mm, the mbe nerveless or externally 5-, sometimes 10-nerved, the triangular or depressed-deltate teeth 0.15-0.45 mm: corolla 46.5 mm, the ovate lobes erect, often of unequal length, to (0.6-)1-2.2 mm; androecium 32-58(—60)-merous, (9-)10-19(-23) mm, the tube 4,5-11(-13) mm, either tubular or distally expanded and trumpet-shaped, either as long as corolla or exserted to 5(-6) mm, the stemonozone +1 mm; disc 0; ovary sessile or almost 50, ellipsoid or oblongellipsoid, either glabrous or laterally puberulent; ovules 8-10.
Pad solitary or to 4 per spike, erratically ascending, narrowly subcylindroid but more or less biconvex and as ovules abort erratically pinched between seeds, outwardly falcate or sometimes recurved through a full circle, or irregularly sinuous or conyolute, measured along the valves (3.5-) 5-12 (-15) cm and at the seeds most often 0.7-1.2 cm, but in SE Mexico to 2,5(-2.7) cm, 7-12 mm diam, the thickly fleshy, reddish, when cipe lignescent and fuscous valves either glabrous or glabrate, mgulose lengthwise or irregularly papillate or both, the stiffly papery endocarp fawn-stramineous but reddish in the seed-cavities, tending to separate from mesocarp after dehiscence; dehiscence elastic, either follicular (through the ventral suture only) or through both sutures, the valves either simply gaping or randomly and coiling; seeds pendulous on and almost fully invested by the elaborately frilled funicular arii, plumply ellipsoid +10-15 x 7.5-10 mm, the bony planoconvex cotyledons enclosed in a thinly papery and fragile, smooth or wrinkled, brown or dark brown testa lacking pleurogram.
In deciduous and semideciduous brush-woodland, surviving disturbance, and in sunny places, especially along streams, in submontane forest, ascending from the coast, where sometimes impinging on mangrove, to 300 m, but in Nueva Galicia to 800 m and along the Rio Cauca in Colombia to 1100 m, locally plentiful: in South America from state of Sucre in Venezuela W along the Caribbean slope to Santa Marta, Colombia, and on the N slope of the Orinoco basin ta Maracaibo basin, thence S up the Magdalena and Cauca valleys to about 2°30'N; in Central America and Mexico scattered, mostly below 300 m, from Darién in Panama to the Pacific and Gulf slopes of Mexico as far as 23- 24°N. — Map 9. — FI. in most months of the year, when not drought-inhibited, new fls sometimes coinciding with ripe fruit. — Ahoga-gato, conchi, fiaure, piquiqua, taquapire, timuche, tucuy (Mexico); abracade (El Salvador), blanco, buche, buche blanco, pinta mono, siracé (Colombia); laguadri, maf cocida, oroce, yacure (Venezuela).
Pithecellobiwn lanceolatum is a handsome small tree, easily known by the combination of amply quadrifoliclate leaves and paniculate spikes of fragrant white flowers.
In foliage it resembles P. rasewn but this differs at anthesis by capinilate flowers and ted or bright pink filaments, and in fruit by a relatively thin-textured fruit and hard areolate seeds.
The more closely related P Aymenaeifoliwn, similar in lignescent fruit and thin-coated exareclate seed, has denser spikes of larger flowers, much longer and further exserted androecial tube, and a characteristic cristate and velutinous epicarp of the ripe pod.
From a South American viewpoint, P lanceolatum is taxonomically straightforward, the variation in pubescence of leaves and ovary and in length of corolla and androecium being insignificant in the context of the genus.
So far as is known, the barren branches are always armed, but the flowering branchlets are often only feebly so, or spineless, In Central America and lowland Mexico the variation in flower size, in proportionate lengths of calyx to corolla and of corolla to androecium, and in absolute length of the androecial tube becomes accentuated, and to some extent is related to geographic dispersal.
As a general rule the androecial tube is a little longer and a little further exserted on the Gulf lowlands in Mexico than on the Pacific slope, where the inflorescence remains nearly uniform from Sinaloa southward into Colombia.
The accumulation of herbarium specimens now shows that variation in indumentum of jeaves, in length of spikes and number of flowers, in length of floral bracts, in depth of calyx, and in Jength of perianth are all continuous, independent, and geographically random.
Variation in the fruit provides a still unsolved problem, which requres extensive field observation.
Two fruit forms, so far as known not correlated with any floral feature of substance, have been recognized at the specific level.
In typical P lanceolatum the mature pod is slender in proportion to its length, commonly about 9-12 mm diameter at each one of about 5-9 seeds; its valves, though unyieldingly lignescent at maturity, are relatively thin-walled and commonly dehisce through the length of both sutures.
By contrast the so-called P packypus, which is the fruiting counterpart of flowering P. calostachys, has a massively woody pod that swells to as much as +2.5 cm diameter at the seeds, and that often, but not consistently, dehisces only along one suture or only through the upper part of both sutures; moreover, its seeds gain in volume as space is provided by a larger cavity.
Often but not quite always this broad pod is also shorter and fewer-seeded than that of typical P fanceolatum, as though incomplete fertilization of the ovary had diverted a fund of resources from several to fewer ovules, with consequences not only for the individual seeds but for the bulk of the fruit itself.
However, we still lack firm correlation between a broad fruit and any particular flower type and are unable to predict the fruit type from antecedent flowers.
The pachypus-type fruit is apparently dominant in Veracrmz, northern Oaxaca, Chiapas, and Petén, but is replaced by a slender one in parts of Yucatan Peninsula It has not been detected on the Pacific slope in Mexico, nor in South America, and may yet deserve infraspecific taxonomic status.
Pithecetlobium lanceolatum and the three species following (Pp. johansenit, winzerlingii, and hymenaeifolium), may be recognized at anthesis by exactly quadrifoliolate leaves accompanied by spiciform units of inflorescence.
The spikes vary in length and density, but when relatively short and therefore comparable to those exceptional spicate populations of P unguis-cati, the androecium is longer (at least 16 mm, usuaily more).
At maturity of the fruit, the papery exareolate seed-coat combined with the simply grooved (not green-winged) leaf-stalks and the number of leaflets per leaf separates these four species from all other species, whether quadrifoliolate or not.
Due to this syndrome of characters we were inclined to separate these four species in a section distinct from the remainder of Pithecellobium.
The phylogenetic analysis shaws, however, that doing so would result in the rest of Pithecetiobium being paraphyletic.
The definition of P. fanceolatum and the same three species fotlowing is hindered by (a) uniformity in aspect of the foliage such as to make sterile material unidentifiable; (b) marked plasticity in size and form of those few features of inflorescence and fruits that are taxonomically promising or have been thought to be so; and (c) difficulty in matching fruits and flowers, which are seldom encountered on the same individual tree.
The center of variability for the group is in southeastern Mexico and neighboring Central America, and its taxonomy in this region is far from securely settled.
The two species that occur in South America are separable there by linked characters of the flower and fruit: relatively short androecium and narrow glabrate, variably roughened but not cristate fruit of P fanceoJatum contrast sharply with the extremely long androecium and bluntly undulate-cristate, minutely velutinous fruit of P. Aymenaeifoliwn.
The same two taxa become less clearly differentiated in western Central America, where discontinuities between lengths of androecium and contrasts between types of pericarp in the fruit are much less precise and are weakened by sometimes sympatric P winzerlingii, which has relatively short androecium coinciding with cristate pods.
Absolute and proportional lengths of the calyx, corolla, and androecium are extraordinarily (and independently) labile, to some degree even within a single unit of inflorescence. in general, the calyx of P fanceolaium is campanulate and less than 2 mm deep, two or three times shorter than the corolla, but is randomly modified into a cup as much as 5 mm deep that almost (R. Torres 4619, CAS) encloses the corolia.
This floral modification, like the indumentum of foliage and the length of floral bracts, occurs independently of other macromorphologic variation and independently of dispersal.
However, the poorly known FP. johansenii may be an exception to this rule.
Comment on the heteromorphic fruits of P. lanceolatum will be found under that species.
The flowers of P. lanceolatum, P. johansenii, P. winzerlingii, and P. hymenaeifolisan ate vespertine, white, and fragrant; they have a long narrow androecial tube, and they seem ideally suited to pollination by night-flying long-tongued Lepidoptera.
It is thearetically possible that the exaggerated length of the androecial tube in P Aymenaeifolium has been mediated by selection, perhaps more than once, from different stocks of P lanceolatwn, but we do not know whether this modification has been accompanied by intersterility other than differentiation of the pollinator, as has occurred in the Orchidaceae.
A taxon starts here.
14, Pithecellobium johansenii Standley, Trop.
Woods 16: 47 ("Pithecolobium 1928 (1 Dec]. —- "Honduras: La Ceiba, December, 1927, Holger Johansen I' — Holotypus, F 572609!.
Pithecellobium telense Britton, N. Amer. Fl, 23: 192.
1928 [20 Dec]. — "Wooded swamp, vicinity of Tela, Atlantida, Honduras, december, 1927—March, 1928, [RP C.] Standtey 54741."
— Holotypus, NY!. — Equated with P johansenii by Standley & Steyermark, 1946: 75.
Macrophyllidious trees and scrambling shridbs attaining 9 m but flowering when much smaller, armed at nodes with ascending, tapering or conical, straight or gently recurved stipular spines, the stout young stems and lf-stks hispid with ascending or erect, pallid or brownish hairs to 0.4-1.4 mm, the chartaceous Ifts olivaceous when young, timing cinnamon-brown, thinly pilosulous glabrescent on upper face, beneath either pilosulous overall or only along nerves, the dense short spikes of fragrant white fls solitary or geminate in further lf-axils of coeval branchlets and sometimes forming, by reduction of distal lvs to depauperate efoliolate an exserted pseudoraceme of spikes or a few-branched panicle.
Stipules 2.5-9.5 mm, at base 0.8-2 mm wide. if, lf-stks 6-18 (-24) mn, at middie mm diam, shallowly openly grooved ventrally; nectary at top of petiole either deeply or shallowly cupular +1—1.5 mm diam, the nectary at tip of each pinna-rachis similar but smaller; pinna-rachises of larger vs 5-9 mm, Ift-pulvinules 1.1-2.70.8-1.2 mm, wrinkled when mature; Iftblades inequilaterally elliptic or obovate-elliptic from semicordate base, deltately short-acuminate, the larger ones 5-1! x 2.5-6.2 cm, +1.7-2,] times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the incurved midrib moderately displaced from midblade, giving rise on each side to 6-9 major incurved-ascending secondary nerves, these all shallowly depressed or immersed on upper face of blade, sharply raised beneath, the tertiary and open reticular venules sometimes weakly raised on upper face, Peduncles 5-24 mm, spikes +40-55-fld, the mature axis +1-2.5 cm, the lowest fls (no further described) sometimes smaller than the rest or imperfect, the rest subhomomorphic; floral bracts narrowly lanceolate (2-)2.5-4 mm, persistent; perianth either 4- or 5-merous, gray-silky-pilosulous overail, the corolla always densely so, the calyx sometimes more thinly; calyx deeply campanulate-subcylindric 3.54.5 x 1.4— 1,7 mm, the incurved subulate teeth 06.4-0,8 mm; corolla 9.5-11 mm, abruptly dilated distally, the ovate lobes 2.1-3 mm; androecium 36—40-merous, 37-44 mm, the stemonozone +1 mm, the tube thickened at base, 22-24 mm, some filaments often cohering into random fascicles beyond the orifice, intrastaminal disc 0: ovary subsessile, oblong-ellipsoid +2 mm, thinly appressed-silky.
Pod narrowly oblong, recurved +5 x 2.5 cm; seeds (one seen mature) +18 x 14 x 12 mm, the aril nearly %4 as long, the papery testa dark brown; pleurogram 0.
In swampy woodlands near sea level, highly localized within the ranges of related P hymenaeifolium and P. winzerlingiz, in coastal Belize (distr. Belize and E] Cayo) and N Honduras (Coldn, Atlantida). — Fl. TAY, the full range not well documented, not mapped.
This is an enigmatic plant, in which a very long androecial tube coincides with a conspicuous indumentum, unusually short leaf-axes, and a deeply campanulate calyx-tube.
It is known only from a limited segment of coastal Belize and Honduras, where it is closely sympatric with P winzerlingit.
The one pod known to us is not fully mature, but seems fundamentally compatible with that of either P winzerlingii or P. Aymenaeifolium.
A comparable calyx and a similar indumentum are known to occur sporadically (but not together) in 2. and may turn out to be parallel modifications of the sympatric P. hymenaeiSolium.
See P. lanceolatum for further discussion.
A taxon starts here.
15, Pithecellobium winzerlingii Britton & Rose, N, Amer. Fl. 23: 193.
1928. — "Westem part of Grange Walk District, British Honduras, March, 1926, (H. U.] Winzerling — Holotypus, US); clastotypus, NY!.
Macrophyllous arborescent shrubs flowering at 2 m but potentially attaining 7 m with trunk(s) to 7-8 cm diam, armed on trunk and at nodes of young branches with straight, stiffly ascending, tapering. spinescent stipules, the young stems and lf-axes commenly glabrous but sometimes puberulent with erect hairs to 0.2 mm, the firmly chartaceous ifts usually glabrous overall, sometimes finely erect-pilosulous along some stronger nerves, exceptionally overall, the densely spiciform units of inflorescence pseudoraceMose at end of homotinous, either foliate or sometimes efoliate branchlets.
Stipzies (1-)2—-10 mm, near base 0.7-1.8 mm diam. Lf-formuia ilt; petioles mostly 3-15 mm, randomly to 30-35 mm, shallowly openly grooved ventrally and a little wider upward, near apex 0.7-1.4 mm wide; a cupular or tub-shaped nectary mm diam at apex of each lf-stk and of each pinna-rachis; pinna-rachises 3-8(-10) mm; Iftblades inequilaterally elliptic or obovate from shallowly semicordate base, at apex either obtuse, or obtuse-mucronulate, or shallowly retuse, not acuminate, the longer ones (3.6-)4-5,7 x 1.5-3 em, (1.7-) 1.8-2.5 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the subcentric, straight or gently incurved midrib giving tise on each side to 7-10 major (with few random intercalary) secondary nerves and to an open reticulum of venules finely prominuious on both faces.
Peduncles (0.4-)1-4 cm; fl-spikes closely 18-55-fld, the axis becoming 7-32 mm, bracts deltate, triangular, or subulate, 0.4-1.1 mm, petsistent; fls sessile, white, fragrant, the 4—S-merous perianth minutely graysilky-strigulose overall, calyx short-campanulate or hemispherical 1.1-1.8 x 1-1.3 mm, the teeth depressed deitate 0.1-0.3 mm, or the orifice truncate; corolla 5.5-8.5 mm, the erect lobes (often unequal) 1-1.9 mm; androecium (20-)24—46-merous, 16-23 mm, the tube 8.5-13.5 mm, the stemonozone obscure, intrastaminal disc 0.2-0.3 x 0.3-0.5 mm.
Pod usually 1 per peduncle, sessile, in profile broad-linear recurved through % to more than 1 complete circle, (5-%-9 x 0.9-1.2 cm, shallowly constricted between seeds, to 8-seeded, compressed but plumply bicenvex, the dark reddish brown, lignescent valves deeply undulately tumulose, minutely velutinous overall, the internally red endocarp tardily separating from the exocarp; dehiscence primarily through the seminiferous suture but ultimately through both sutures, the valves gaping and twisting; seeds plumply oblongobovaid, in broader view 9.5-14 x 6.5-10 mm, the lustrous brown papery testa becoming fragile, the arilliform funicle investing nearly half the seed, pleurogram 0.
Either solitary or crowded into riparian thickets, within and at edge of mangrove swamps, on lagoon shores, and on inundated banks of slow-moving streams, commonly near sea level and rarely above 10 mm (reported to 70 m), localized in SE Mexico and NE Central America: Gulf coastal lowlands of SE Veracruz, N Tabasco, and adj. Campeche; Belize, N from Stann Creek District just into Quintana Roo; and on the N coast of Honduras in prov. Col6n. — Map 10. — Fi. (VD VII-XII. — Red fowl, perhaps in reference to the wattle-like red aril nidulating the seed.
Pithecellobium winzerlingti is somewhat cryptically distinguished from P fancealatum by the syndrome of rather small, obtuse (never acuminate) leaflets, short and dense flower-spikes, and the bluntly crested pad of P kymenaeifolium.
It appears to be confined to swamp habitats.
See P. lanceolatum for further discussion.
A taxon starts here.
16.
Pithecellobium hymenaeifolium (Willdenow) Bentham, London J. Bot. 3: 198 ("Pithecolobium hymenaeaefolium').
1844.
Inga hymenaeaefolia Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willedenow, Sp. Pl. 4: 1008.
1806. — "Habitat in Nova The locality was expanded by Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth, Nova Gen. Sp. 6(qu.): 296.
1824: "... prope Caripe Cumanensium, alt. 400 hex, [edo Sucre, Venezuela, 700+ mj]. — Holotypus, Humboldt & Bonpland 579 e Caripe, B-WILLD 19013, seen in microfiche and in F Neg. 2/991, isotypus, P-HBK!. — Mimosa hymenaeaefolia (Willdenow) Poiret, Encycl. Suppl. 1: 38.
1810. — Feuilleea hymenaeaefolia (Willdenow) O. Kuntze, Revis.
Gen. PL. 1: 188.
1891.
Macrophyllidious shrubs and trees with 1-few trunks, fertile at 1.5-5.5 m, when crowded incipiently sarmentose, armed at some or all nodes with stout spinescent stipules, the annotinous branches densely lenticellate, the young branchlets, all lf-axes and inflorescence densely minutely pallid-puberulent, the olivaceous foliage subconcolorous, the stiffly papery Ifts glabrous or sometimes minutely ciliolate proximally (exceptionally barbate dorsally in anterior basal angle of midrib), the dense massive spikes of greenish fls with far-exserted white androecium bore solitary or paired in distal lf-axils, the furthest sometimes forming a short pseudoraceme of spikes.
Stipules at most nodes 2-12 mm, tapering from broad, either terete or laterally compressed base, either straight and widely divergent or recurved, some upper ones sometimes reduced to a conic point 1 mm or less.
Lfformuia i/1, all ivs exactly 4-foliolate, the Ift-pairs sometimes not quite homomorphic (the posterior one a trifle larger); Ift-stks (of some saplings, not further described, -6) cm, shallowly open-grooved ventrally, at middle 1.2-2.4 mm diam, nectaries at tip of lf-stk and of each pinna-rachis sessile, patelliform 1-3 mm diam, either round or often crumpled; pinna-rachises (S—) 7-22 (-26) mm, dilated upward; lft-pulvinules 2-4 x 1.2-2 mm, coarsely cross-wrinkled; Ifts inequilaterally ovateor lance-elliptic from semicordate base, sometimes shortly bluntly acuminate, at very apex obtuse or obtuse mucronulate, the larger ones x (2-) 2.4-5.7 cm, (1.7-)2-3 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the subcentric or moderately displaced midrib gently incurved and giving rise on each side to +6-10 major (and random intercalary) secondary nerves, brachidodrome well within the plane or loosely revolute margin, and these to an elaborate teticulum of yeinlets, the whole venation bluntly prominulons on both faces or more sharply so beneath.
Peduncies stiffly ascending (1.5-)2-6 cm; spikes usually dense, the fls subcontiguous, rarely more open, the deeply sulcate rachis 2-8(-14) cm; bracts deltate acuminulate 0.3-1 mm, persistent; fls homomorphic, sessile, 5-merous, the greenish perianth minutely densely puberulent or silky-strigulose overall, the androecium far exserted; calyces (sometimes a little larger upward along the spike) campanulate (1.1-) 1.3-3 x (1.1-)1,3-2.3 mn, either weakly or sharply 5-10-nerved, often a little constricted below the teeth, these depressed-deltate or -ovate 0,2-0.5 mm, or the orifice subtruncate; corolla prior to anthesis pyciform, at anthesis trumpet-shaped (7—-)7.5—11.5 mm, the erect ovate lobes (1.5—-)1.8-3.4 x 1.4-2.2 mm, androecium 38-64-merous, (36-) mm long, the stemonozone 0.8-1.6 mm, the tube mm, internally at base either obscurely callous or with well developed 5-lobed nectarial disc 0.2-0.4 mimi tall surrounding the very short stipe of the ovary, this oblong, rather abruptly contracted at each end, densely silky-strigulose overall; style filiform; ovules 8-10, Pods 1-3 per spike, sessile, in profile broadlinear evenly decurved through 4-1% circles, 6-9.5 x 1.1-1.8 cm, laterally compressed but plump and the broad sutures not prominent, the dorsal suture undulately constricted between seeds, the ventral not or less so, the stiffly coriaceous lignescent valves externally dark red-brown, densely subvelutinously pilosulous and irregularly tumulose-cristate overall, reddish within, the cavity continuous; dehiscence follicular, through the gaping adaxial suture, exposing the seeds invested in an elaborately frilled red aril; seeds (few seen fully cipe) plumply ellipsoid, the papery testa black, lacking pleurogram, the homy embryo biconvex, without endosperm.
In deciduous and semideciduous brush-woodland, surviving disturbance in hedges and in pasturethickets, mastly below 200 m but perhaps (in the type locality, not confirmed subsequently) to +700 m, discontinuously dispersed in NW South and Central America; N and NW Venezuela, from Sucre to Zulia, sparingly S to the edge of the Orinoco Ilanos in Barinas; far N Colombia (foothills of Sa. Sta. Marta); centr. Panama; SE Mexico (N Oaxaca, Veracruz, N Chiapas); adj. Guatemala (Petén); Caribbean iowlands of Belize; not recorded from Honduras, Nicavagua, Costa Rica, — Map 11. — Fl, intermittently throughout the year, the fls often coeval with longpersistent, dehiscent fruits. —- Maiz cocido, wia-deforo (Venezuela).
Relatively massive flower-spikes and far-exserted androecia, followed by stiff-walled, tumulosecristate, densely pilosulous fruits render P hymenaetfolium unmistakable.
See P. fanceolanen for further discussion.
A taxon starts here.
17.
Pithecellobium furcatum Bentham, London J. Bot. 5: 106 (sub Pithecoiobio).
1846. — "On the Rio Teapa in [Tabasco] South Mexico, — Holotypus, Linden 723, collected VII-IX, 1838 (f1.), K!= K Neg. 5527 = photo 5.2., NY '; isotypus, Fl. Macrophyllidious trees and arborescent shrubs 3- 12 m with trunk to +1 dm dbh, randomly armed at nodes with stout, widely ascending, straight tapering stipular spines, appearing glabrous to the gray-silky corollas but the young branchlets and units of inflorescence somewhat thinly minutely pallid-pnberulent, the ample, truly glabrous, dull olivaceous Ifts subconcolorous, the short, often capituliform spikes of white vespertine fls either axillary to coeval lys or forming a short efoliate peudoraceme.
Stipules at armed nodes 4—12 mm, at base dilated and recurrent, those at unarmed nodes stiffly subulate-acicular +0.5-2 mm, all persistent.
Lf-formula i/1, each If 4- foliolate; lf-stks 0.6-5.5 cm, usually broadly marginate, the herbaceous wings wider upward and to 10 mm distally, but the wings occasionally lacking or almost so; a sessile cupular nectary +0,6—1 mm diam at tip of lf-stk and at tip of each pinna; pinna-rachises 6-15 mm, like the lf-stk marginate or not; Ifts elliptic or obovate-elliptic from inequilaterat, either cuneate or shallowly semicordate base, shortly bluntly acuminate, the larger ones 3.5-9.5 x 1.5-3.5 cm, 2.3-3.3 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the subcentric midrib gently incurved, giving rise to +7-10 pairs of major and indefinite intercalary secondary nerves brochidodrome shortly within the plane margin, and these in turn to an open reticulum of veinlets, the whole venation finely prominulous on both faces or subimmersed on upper one.
Peduricles solitary 0,4-3 cm; spikes +14-35-fld, the axis 4-12 mm, the homomorphic fls ascending, the perianth S-merous, the calyx firm brown striate, thinly strigulose, the corotla externally silky with appressed gray hairs; bracts ovateor deltate-acuminulate 0.7—1.5 mm, persistent; calyx cylindric or cylindro-campanulate 4.5-7.5 x +2 mm, the often unequal, ovate apiculate teeth 0.6-1.5 mm; corolla narrowly trampet-shaped 8-12 mm, the ascending ovate lobes 1.7-2.5 x 1.2-2 mm, androecium 36-62-merous, 31-46 mm, the stemonozene 1.6-2.2 mm, the slender tube mm; disc 0; ovary minutely stipitate, the eliipsoid body densely puberulent; style shortly exserted from stamens, the stigma poriform.
Pods (few seen) sessile, in profile oblong, gently recurved, +5 x 2 cm, laterally compressed but plump, the fuscous-castaneous woody valves becoming finely mgulose, early glabrescent; dehiscence follicular, through the ventral sutures; funicle tapelike, dilated into a scalloped aril nearly half as long as seed, this not seen fully mature.
In riparian forest below 100 m, localized in SE Mexico (S Veracruz, E Oaxaca, Tabasco, N Chiapas), adj. Guatemala (Alta Verapaz), and Belize (Toledo).
The white flowers (Sousa 9276, CAS) begin to expand at 4:00 PM. — Not mapped. — FI.
Il, VI, IX, X, XII, the full season unknown. — Amezquite.
Pithecellobium furcatwn is unique in the greenwinged leaf-axes that recall species of inga and Swartzia arborescens, even though these, of course, have once-, not twice-, pinnate leaves.
A taxon starts here.
18.
Pithecellobium macrandrium J. D. Smith, Bot. Gaz, (Crawfordsville) 40: 3 (sub Pithecolobio sect. Chloroleuco).
1905. — "In silvis ad Cubilquitz, Depart.
Alta Verapaz, alt. 350 m, Jul. 1902, Nov. 1904, von Tuerckheim, nn, 8193, 8667, ex PL. — Lectotypus, no. 8/93, US 576512!: isotypus, NY!; paratypi, no. 8667 NY!, US!. spinescent stipules, the young stems, the lf-axes, and the inflorescence densely or thinly either pilosulous or puberulent with fine, erect or incumbent, sordidgray hairs to 0.15—0.4 mm, the lvs discolored, the Ifts dull olivceous (when dry brown) above, paler beneath, pubescent either on both faces, or beneath only, or facially glabrous ciliolate, the massive, relatively long-pedunculate spikes of greenish white, white-stamened fls either solitary or paired in the axil of coeval lvs, but the furthest lvs sometimes much reduced upward and the inflorescence then pseudoracemose exserted.
Stipules associated with ampler lvs persistent, mostly 5-25 mm, angulate and vulnerant, but at random nodes much shorter, those of reduced or rudimentary distal lvs and of axillary buds acicular and <2.5 mm. if-formula y-xii/9-30 (of some distal lys, no further described, lfstks of major lvs (9-)12-19 cm, the petiole (0.7-)1— 3.5(-5.5) cm, at middle 1.5—-2.8 mm diam, the longer interpinnal segments +1,5-4 cm, the deep ventral sulcus interrupted at insertion of each pinna-pair by a cupular nectary; proximal nectary either sessile or shortly stoutly stipitate 1-2.5 mm diam, in profile not over 0.5 mm tall, succeeding ones similar or a little smailer, and much smaller, more evidently stipitate nectaries on pinna-rachises between third to ninth dista] lft-pairs; pinnae decrescent proximally and often somewhat so distally, the rachis of longer ones 5-11 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments (2.5—) mm; leaflets elliptic, ovateor lance-elliptic from a scarcely inequilateral, cuneate or shallowly cordate base, rounded or shortly bluntly acuminate, the larger ones 11-28 x 3-7 mm, times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the straight centric midrib giving rise on each side to +5-7 major (but slender) ascending secondary venules brochidodrome well within the plane margin and to sinuous minor ones with tertiary connecting venules, the whole venation of mature Ifts immersed or almost so on upper face, finely prominulous beneath.
Peduricles stout ascending 4-12 em; spikes densely (25-)35-80-fld, the axis at matutity (2-)3-9.5 cm; bracts commonly ovate shortacuminate, sometimes lanceolate, 1.5-2.5 mm, firm and persistent, fls homomorphic, widely spreadingascending, sessile or almost so, the firm thick-textured perianth gray-strigulous overall, calyx hemispheric or shallowly campanulate 1.9-3.2 x 2.3-3.2 mm, the depressed-deltate teeth 0.3-0.6 mm; corolla pyriform in bud becoming widely funnel-shaped 9-13 mm, the ascending lobes 2-4,6 x 2.2-2.9 mm; androecium 52--76-merous (2.8-)3.2-5.5 cm, the stemonozone 1-2.4 mm, the tube (15-)17.5-22 mm, somewhat thickened internally at base into distinct callosities 0.3-0.5 mm tall but these often wanting, ovary (exceptionally 2) subsessile, narrowly ellipsoid, shallowly grooved laterally, glabrous, Pods (few seen fully Tipe) subsessile, in profile undulately narrow-oblong or broad-linear, compressed but plump, straight or gently decurved, obtuse, x 1.2-1.8 cm, 3-8- seeded, the broad sutures not prominent, undulately constricted between seeds, the subsucculent (partly fesinous), minutely puberulent valves becoming stiffly leathery or ligneous, externally fuscous wrinkled, internally reddish brown; dehiscence follicular [7]; seeds obliquely ascending, semi-imbricate, plumply ellipsoid attainmg 14-18 x 9.5-10 mm, halfenclosed in an elaborately lobed, orange or scarlet aril, the thin testa lustrous black, smooth or wrinkled, pleurogram 0.
In pine-palmetto savanna and disturbed or regenerating woodland, from sea level to 350 m in the intetior, locally plentiful in Belize, from coastal lowlands to foothills of Maya Mts., W across Petén, Guatemala to the Usumacinta valley in SE Tabasco and N Chiapas, Mexico, into Alta Verapaz, Guatemala, — Map 12, — Fl. VI-III. — Prickfewood (Belize), motiila (Guatemala).
In an absent-minded moment Rico (1991: 519) called P macrandriwn endemic to Belize, even though it was described from Alta Verapaz in Guatemala.
Pithecellobium macrandrium resembles P. lanceotatum, P. johansenti, P. winzerlingii, and P. hymenaeifolium in inflorescence, individual flowers, and fruits; it differs only in elaborately decompound (not quadrifoliate) leaves.
Pithecellobituum peckii and P. bipinnatum resemble P macrandrium in the relatively high leaf-formula, but differ from it (as well as from Pp. lanceolatum, johansenti, winzerlingti, and hymenaeifotium) in short sessile spikes of smaller flowers.
A taxon starts here.
1.
Cojoba catenata (Donnell Smith) Britton & Rose, N. Amer, FI.
23: 32.
1928.
Pithecolobium catenatum Donnell] Smith, Bot. Gaz. (Crawfordsville) 48: 294.
1909. — "In silvis profundis ad praedium Suerre vocatum, Lianuras de Santa Clara, Comarca de Limdén, Costa Rica, alt 300 m, Febr 1896 John Bonneil Smith n.
6479 ex PJ, Guat. etc. quas ed. Donn. — Holotypus, US 942475); isotypi, NY!, US 942476!.
Amply foliate shrubs and understory trees to 15 m tall and 30 cm dbh, the bark on branchtets and young twigs greenish with white-pustular lenticels, the young buds red-brown or golden-red velvety with straight hairs to 0.3 mm long, as well as puberulent with short, blond, incurved hairs, the long red-brown hairs eventually deciduous, the blond incurved ones persistent on young stems, lf-axes, and peduncles, and sometimes on the major veins of both surfaces of the Ifts, the vs bicolored, the Ifts olivaceous sublustrous on upper surface, brighter, lighter green on lower, the pendent peduncles of white or green-white flowers arising one or two axillary to coeval leaves, or described as ramiflorous, the fruit apparently developing and persistent well past abscision of subtending lf.
Stiputes deltate to triangular, 0.6-1.25 mm, glabrate on dorsal side though partly red-puberulent, or glabrous, when glabrous (the type) one-nerved and hyline-margined, fugacious, some stipules covering growing buds 2-2.5 mm long and homy.
Lf-formula if(1—)1.5—6, the terete petiole (0.4-)1-6 cm, continuing past pinna-pair as a thickened, coarse, dorsiventrally flattened appendage to 4 mm, this withering with age, the petiole proper charged or not between pinna-pair with a short-stalked to sessile, cupular or crateriform thick-rimmed nectary 0.5-1 mm diam, similar but smaller nectaries between Ift-pairs; pinnarachis 2.2-8 cm, the interfoliolar segments 1.8—3 cm; Ift-pulvinules 0.75-3.5 mm, the long axis more or less perpendicular to the rachis, the whole more or less smooth or coarsely wrinkled, golden-puberulent; ifts distally accrescent, the longer terminal or penultimate pair ovate, obovate or asymmetrically obelliptic from an inequilateral semicordate or broadly attenuate base, 8-13 x 2-6 cm, the apex rounded to acuminate; venation pinnate-palmate (rarely in larger leaves obscurely pinnate), the centric midrib nearly straight or more commonly faintly falcate, the 4-8 widely ascending secondary nerves brochidodrome shortly within the plane margin, the whole venation imtmersed discolored on upper surface, prominulous on lower.
Peduncies 1.4-18 cm, charged or not midway to near the base of the capimlum with a coarse, incurved, thickened bract, bracts proximally spatulate or obtrullate, distally becoming linear-spatulate, or all linear-lanceolate, 0.75-2.25 mm, shorter or longer than the flower buds, not at all to much thickened near broadest part but not sharply incurved, deciduous or persistent into fruiting; capicula 30-54 flowered, the flowers radiating in all directions from a globose or ellipsoid receptacle mm diam, perianth 4-Smerous, the corolla at Jeast very thin-textured and when dry fragile, glabrous externally save for the redbrown-puberulent calyx-lobes and golden-brownpuberulent corolla-lobes; calyx deeply narrowly campanulate mm, the erect-incurved, equal or unequal deltate lobes 0.1-0.5 mm; corolla narrowly funnelform-campanulate, gently dilated distally, 9.5— 20 mm, the erect or gently reflexed, lanceolate or lance-ovate, unequal lobes 0.75-2.5 mm; androecium 19-35 mm, 19-54-merous, the tube mm, included in corolla, thickened at base but lacking nectarial disc, the stemonozone 1-2 mm; ovary elliptic glabrous sessile or on a stipe to 0.75 mm long, the style barely but obviously surpassing the starnens, the stigma poriform.
Pods 1 or 2 per capitulum, subsessile from an abruptly contracted base, in profile undulately Linear-submoniliform to moniliform, with age gently twisted, +5-11-seeded, 18 cm long and 1 cm broad over seed cavities, the sutural ribs thickened and 1-2 mm broad, the valves red when fresh, when dry dark seal-brown and minutely goiden-brownpuberulent, coarsely but sparingly wrinkled, internally tan, lustrous, the incipient dehiscence through the ventral or both sutures, apparently starting at the middle of the pod; seeds ellipsoid 14-15 x 5.5-7 mm, shiny dark-brown to black, coarsely wrinkled, persistent for at least a short time on a short, strap-shaped, easily broken funicle.
In wet forest, sometimes riparian; widespread in Costa Rica, in the NW on the W slopes of the cordilleras in prov. Guanacaste, E and on the Caribbean slopes to N Panama, and on the Penisola de Osa, prov. Puntarenas; isolated in dept.
Izabal, Guatemala, and dept.
Coldn, Honduras.
Elev. from near sea leye] to 1350 m. — Map 13. — Fl. X1-VII, possibly throughout the year; the dried fruit long persistent on the tree.
Cojoba catenata is variable in size and number of both vegetative and floral organs, and it is with some hesitation that C. valerioi is reduced to synonymy, for it is smaller in all respects.
However, the differences in size are not absolute, and any differences used to sepatate the two would really be contrived.
Furthermore, removing C. vaterioi from catenata would not leave the latter much less variable nor better defined.
It may be that arduous field study will lead to a better understanding of the taxon and to some credible differences between segregate species.
These differences have not been found through study of herbarium material.
A taxon starts here.
2.
Cojoba arborea (Linnaeus) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fi, 23: 29, 1928.
Mimosa arborea Linnaeus, Sp. Pl. 519.
1753. —- Typus infra sub var. arborea proponitur.
Unarmed, multifoliolate trees m tall with cunk attaining 1.5-10 cm dbh and gray furrowed bark, the new stems, lf-axes, and peduncles densely pilosulous with loosely incurved-ascending or straight, widely spreading, brown or in age sordidgray hairs to 0.15-0.35 mm, the lf-buds dark-brownvelvety, the lvs bicolored, the thin-textured Ifts rich green sublustrous above, pale beneath, commonly quite glabrous or facially so and minutely citiolate but sometimes remotely minutely strigulose on either face, when dry usually loosely involute and shallowly concave ventrally, the dense globose capitula of greenish, white-stamened fls rarely solitary, more often fasciculate and arising sequentially in axils of mature coeval and of recently new-fallen lvs, hence cither immersed in or surpassed by foliage.
Stipules obsolete Lf-formula iii—x 1) lf-stks of well-developed lvs (2-)2.5-28(-36) cm, the petiole +1.5-4.5(-7) em, the longer interpinna! segments (6-)7—27 mm; a sessile, round or elliptic, cupular thick-rimmed nectary 0.6-1.7 mm diam between (or immediately below) each pair of pinnae and often near midpetiole, exceptionally a similar but minute nectary at tip of some pinna-rachises; pinnae decrescent proximally, less or scarcely so distally, the rachis of longest pait mostly 5-10 cm, in amplest (especially of saplingor shade-branches) to 12-16 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.4-4 mm; lfpulvinules of each !ft-pair subcontiguous on ventral side of pinna-rachis, 0.3-0.6 x 0.5-0.8 mm, transversely few-wrinkled, the Ifts sessile against rachis; Ifts a little decrescent proximally, thence subequilong, the blade inequilaterally lanceolate or narrowly oblong from shallowly semicordate-auriculate base, either obtuse, deltately subacute, or more often acuminate, those near mid-rachis (6.5—-)7—-15(-17) x (.
5-)1.6-5 mm, (2.8-)3-5,2(-5.6) times as long as wide; venation weak and often indistinct except for slender, subcentric or slightly forwardly displaced, straight or distally faleate midrib, when evident (on hypophyltum only) palmate and pinnate, the posterior nerves from pulvinule 2-3, the inner one expiring or faintly brochidodrome short of midbiade, the few secondary nerves from midrib widely ascending or subhorizontal, an extremely fine random tertiary venulation sometimes raised on lower face.
Peduncles 8 per fascicle, the longer ones (2-)3-8 cm, all charged near or above middle with a caducous bractecle; capitula (25-)30-60-fld, the sessile homomorphic 5- merous fls spreading in all directions from a subglobose or plumply clavate receptacle 2-5.5 mm, bracts spatulate with incurved tip, 0.45-0.85 mm, brownpuberulent dorsally, deciduous; perianth greenish sometimes red-tinged, externally glabrous except for nearly always brown-puberulent caiyx-teeth and often minutely puberulent tip of corolla-lobes; calyx deeply campanulate or subcylindric, faintly 5-nerved, 1.8-3.6 (-3.9) x 0.7-1.3 mm, the depressed-deltate or almost ebsolete teeth 0.05-0.3(-0.6) mm; corolla slenderly tubular, scarcely dilated upward, mm, the ascetxiing ovate lobes (0.3-)0.5—1,.4 mm, intemally ciliolate with minute dilated pallid trichomes; androecium 20-42-merous, 10-15.5(-17.5) mm, the stemonozone +1 mm or less, the tbe mm, sometimes a little thickened internally at base but lacking nectarial disc; ovary subsessile, slenderly ellipsoid, at anthesis glabrous; style a little surpassing the longer stamens, the stigma poriform.
Pods solitary or 2-3 per capitulum, pendulous, subcylindric or moniliform, in profile either undulately linear or (when relatively long or when ovules abort) pinched between seeds into narrow isthmi, either gently or strongly falcate and in addition often randomly twisted, when well fertilized 8-18(-22) x 0.55-1.4 cm, 7-14-seeded, the seeds either almost contiguous end to end or in longer pods mutually distant, the sutures and venation of valves immersed, the smooth fleshy, minutely densely puberulent or velutinous, bright red valves becoming stiff but brittle-leathery and brown or fuscousted after dehiscence, the endocarp smooth, light tan; dehiscence through both sutures, the valves gaping to expose seeds dangling on a pallid threadlike funiculus, this compressed but not sigmoid next to seed, simply bent backward within the fruit and after dehiscence straightening and wiry-persistent; seeds basipetal, basifixed, plumply ellipsoid and only a trifle compressed, in broader view 6—-13(—18) x 5.5-11 mm, the thin testa lustrous black becoming dry and fragile, closely investing the whitish or greenish embryo.
This is a widely dispersed species variable in leafformula and venation of leaflets, in size of seeds (and seed-locules), and in length of stamen-tube, but the modes of variation, while overlapping, are clearly related to dispersal and seem worthy of some taxonomic expression.
A taxon starts here.
2a.
Cojoba arborea var. arborea.
C. arborea Britton & Rose, 1928, Lc., sens. str. (exclus. syn. jacquin.
Lysitomati pertinenti).
Mimosa arborea Linnaeus, Sp. Pl. 519.
1753. — "Habitat in Jamaicae & Caribaearum — Based on Acacia jamaicensis non spinosa etc.
Plukenet, Phytographia 251, fig. 2.
1691 and A. arborea maxima non spinosa etc.
Sloane, Voy.
Jamaica 2: 54, 182, figs. 1,2.
1725.
Lectotypus, Sloane's t. 182, just cited. — Non M. arborea sensu Linnaeus, Sp. Pl. ed. 2, 1503.
1762, quae (quoad descriptionem et specimen Browneanum in hb, Linn.) = Acacia villosa Willdenow. — Acacia arborea (L.) Willdenow, Sp. Pi.
4(2): 1064.
1806. — Pithecolobium arbareum (L.) Urban, Symb.
Ant.
2: 259.
1900. — Samanea arborea Ricker in Bailey, Stand.
Cycl.
Hort. 6: 3066.
1917.
Trees attaining 35 or rarely 60 m with tnink to 1 m dbh; tvs relatively ample, the lf-stk of larger ones (9-)10-28 cm; lf-formula and relatively large seeds as given in key to varieties.
In perennially moist forest, or along streams in seasonally dry forest, both in the lowlands and at submontane elevations (in the coffee belt), widespread in SE Mexico, Central America, some Greater Antilles, and in remote stations in NW South America: in Mexico from the Gulf Coastal Plain and E slope of Sa. Madre Oriental in N Veracnuz and extreme SE S. Luis Potosf to Tabasco, Sa Madre del Sur in Oaxaca, and montane Chiapas, thence into lowland Belize and SE, at m in Guatemala, at 1740 m in El Salvador, to below 100 m on Penfnsula de Osa in Costa Rica; in the Antilles commen in forested upland Jamaica and Puerto Rico, with outposts on Cuba (S Oriente) and Haiti (Sud-Quest); in South America known from N Colombia (coast of Chocé; vicinity of Medellin, Antioquia, at +1500 m, possibly only planted); N Pacific Ecuador, seemingly native; and headwaters of Rio Huallaga, at 800 m in Hudnuco, Peru, questionably native. — Map 14. — FI. prolifically in North America and randomly at other times. — Wild tamarind (Jamaica, Belize), and in form of lumber sabicu (better reserved for Lysitoma); barba de jolote, camaronero, cola de mico, cola marana, coralilio, frijoliito (Mexico, Central America); collier (Haiti); cojoba, cojobana (Puerto Rico); dormitén (Ecuador); sirarcitio (Peru).
A taxon starts here.
2b.
Cojoba arborea var. cubensis (Bisse) Barneby & Grimes, comb. et stat. nov. Pithecellobium cubense Bisse, Ciencias (Cuba), Bot. 2: 7.
1975. — "Cuba, Pinar de] Rio; Vinales: .
.
. km 16,5 de la carretera Vinales-Pinar del Rio . , , Nr.
541, 1966 nov. 27, leg: J. — Holotypus, HAJB n.v.; isotypus, JE 000541', — Twelve paratypi, all collected by Bisse & al., are cited, but none of the numerous examples assembled by C. Wright, Britton and collaborators, or Bro.
Leén.
Pithecellobium arboreum sensu atict. recentior., maxima ex Parte quoad floras cubensem et hispaniolanam; non var. arborea sens. str. Like var. arborea except in lesser stature, rarely over 15 m, and in characters of foliage, usuaily shorter androecial tube, smaller seeds, as given in key to varieties; lf-stk of larger lvs +2-9 cm.
In seasonally dry woodland and along streams, 5-850 m, widespread and common in Cuba, from Pinar del Rfo to Oriente; on Hispaniola recorded from Haiti only from dept.
Nord-Ouest, in Domincan Republic scattered across the N and E departments. — Map 14. — I-VI, randomly in other months. — Abey, calo moruro.
The var. cubensis, well known to Britton in the field, was not distinguished by him from typical C. arborea, which he had collected frequently in Puerto Rico and Jamaica.
It seems to represent an ecotype prevalent in woodland drier (at Jeast during part of the year) than that normally tolerated by var. arborea.
A taxon starts here.
2c. Cojoba arborea var. angustifolia (Rusby) Bameby & Grimes, comb. nov, Pithecolobiuwmn (?) saphorocarpum var. angustifoliun Rusby, Mem, Torrey Bot. Club 6: 29.
1896. — Vic, Guanai, 1892 ((M. 16060."
— Holotypus, NY!. — Pithecolobiwn angustifolium (Rusby) Rusby, Mem, New York Bot. Gard. 7: 253.
1927.
At maturity 8-15 dm tall; lf-formula labile, overlapping in number those of vars. arborea and cubensis, the longer lf-stks 5-12(-17) cm, with interpinnal segments to 1.2-2.7 cm, but the Ifts finely sharply yenulose on lower face; lf-formula as given in key to varieties; larger lfts mostly 12-21 x 2.5-4 mm, 4-5.6 times as long as wide; pod 9-16 x 0.8-1.1 mm, 1G-12-seeded, the seeds 8-10 x 6-7 mm, often but not consistently separated by elongate isthmi.
In semitropical semideciduous woodland, surviving disturbance, and in savanna-rain forest ecotone, 400-1400 m, locally plentiful along and near the Andean piedmont in Bolivia, at lat. 14°30-19°S; planted as a street tree in the city of Sta Cruz. — Map 14. — Fi.
XIII, and intermittently later, the fls and fts often coeval.
The var. angustifolium is highly variable in leafformula, the foliage sometimes (as in the type) suggesting vat. arborea, but more often var. cubensis.
It has the long filament-tube of var. arborea, but the relatively few leaflets of var. cubensis.
In most specimens the seeds, of a size with var. cubensis, are separated by linear isthmi, but this character is not diagnostic.
The var. angustifolia seems to differ from each of the two varieties recognized above principally in the prominulous pinnate and tertiary reticulation of the leaflets and by its disjunct range of dispersal.
A taxon starts here.
3.
Cojoba escuintlensis (Lundell) L. Rico, Kew Bull. AG: 507.
1991.
Pithecolobium escuintlense Lundell, Contr. Univ. Michigan Herb. 7; 15.
1942, — "Mexico: Chiapas, Santa Rosa, near Escuintla .
.
.
Eizi Matuda 4260."
— Holotypus, MICHI; isotypi, F 1123726!, MO 1279503!, NY!.
Unarmed trees to 10 m tall, the young stems and lvs densely red-puberulent with incurved-ascending or appressed hairs 0.1-0.4 mm long, the Ift-pulvinules, dorsal and sometimes ventral side of lf-axes biondpuberulent, the vs bicolored dark-green lustrous above, paler beneath, the margins sometimes feebly undulate, the fascicles of sequentially maturing peduncles axillary to coeval leaves or on efoliate nodes of annotinous branches.
Stipudes deltoid(!), +1 mm, fugacious, present only at inception of leaves.
Lfformula (ii-)iii-ivlS—12, the somewhat dorsiventrally flattened or more or less terete lf-stalks (3.8-)7.5-14.5 om, the petiole 2.3-4.5 cm, the interpinnal segments cm, the petiole charged nearly half-way, or immediately below first pinna-pair (but not in both places) with an elliptic immersed-poriform or round, mounded, or crateriform nectary 0.75-2 mm diam, similar or sessile pate!liform nectaries present immediately below each or all but the furthest pinna-pairs; pinnae, except for the sometimes smaller proximal pair, subequilong, (5,5-)7.5-15 om, the interfoliolar segments 8-4] mm; lft-pulvinules round or ellipsoid 1-1.5 mm diam on long axis, transversely wrinkled, in dried specimens folding ventrally, Ifts appressed against pinna-rachis; Ifts elliptic, ovateor oblongelliptic from an inequilaterally attenuate base, the terminal pair sometimes falcately so, otherwise not dissimilar, proximally somewhat decrescent, the longer ones at mid-rachis 19-25 x 7-13 mm, 1.9-2.7 times longer than wide, the apex inequilaterally broadly acute or rounded, glabrous save for the ventrally sparingly to moderately blond-puberulent midrib and pulvinus, also sometimes ciliolate; venation pinnatepalmate, the midrib subcentric to forwardly displaced to divide blade +1:2, secondary and tertiary venation obscure on upper surface, on lower surface with posterior veins from pulvinus, the inner one brochidodrome well below or beyond half-way up leaflet, the fine tertiary venation subprominulous.
Peduncles 1-5 per fascicle, sometimes only one at a time in bloom, the others formed but not developed, more or less subequilong or grossly disparate in length, to 4 em, charged or not above middle with a thickened bract; capitula 43-54-flowered, the sessile homomorphic 4-5-merous flowers spreading in all directions from a globose or subclavate receptacle 2.25-3.5 mm diam; bracts somewhat dimorphic, the basal ones obovate or obtriangular, +0.75 mm, distally becoming more linear-spatulate and to 1.25 mm, all somewhat thickened distally and densely red-brown-puberulent, deciduous; perianth 5-merous, extemally uniformly pale-brown-puberulent, or red-brown-puberulent only on the calyxand coroila-lobes; calyx cylindric-campanulate x 0.75-1.5 mm, + 4-angulate at base, contracted or not into a pedicel to 0.5 mm long, always broader than long, the unequal, broadly deltate teeth 0.1-0.3 mm; corolla narrowly cylindricfunneliorm 6.5-7,5 mm, the ascending lance-pvate lobes 1—-1.25 mm, minutely internally cucullate at tip; androecium +23—44-merous, 10-13 mm, the stemonozone 0.75—1.25 mm, the tube 4,5-8 mm, included in or surpassing the corolla lobes, thickened at base but probably lacking a nectarial disc; ovary subsessile, elliptic, glabrous; style more or less equal to or a little surpassing the stamens, the stigma poriform, Pod (onc seen not complete) from reconstruction moniliform +8 cm long, 1.6 cm broad over seed-cavities, the valves externally red when fresh, when dry evenulose brown and wrinkled, internally brown-lustrous in seed-cavities; seeds seen only broken, +15-16 mm long, the seed-coat lustrous black.
In montane wet forest at 1400-2600 m, known only from Sierra Madre de Chiapas, Chiapas, Mexico. — Map 15. — FI.
XI, D-IV, fr.
VE Cojoba escuintlensis is included in the arboreaclade on the basis of the sequentially maturing unitinflorescences (Fig. 3, char.
14), and furthermore is sister-group to beckii+chazutensis, with which it shares leaf-neciaries between most if not all leafletpairs, It should be noted that two homoplasious characters, namely deltoid stipules (no. 3) and dimorphic bracts (no. 12) are also shared with C. sophorocarpa and castaricensis,
A taxon starts here.
4.
Cojoba beckii Barmeby & Grimes, sp. nov., ab aliis congeneribus austroamericanis omnibus foliotum formula foliolorumque amplitudine (pinnis 1-2-jugis, foliolis 6-8-jugis et fere 2-3 cm usque latis) prime intuitu distincta. — BOLIVIA.
La Paz, Nord-Yungas: Caranayi, 12 km hacia Corcico, 16.1X.1981 (fl), S. G. Beck 4860. — Holotypus, NY. — Ibid., cataracts of Rio Bopi, 2.
VII1.1921 (fl), H. H. Rusby 702. — Paratypi, GH, NY, US. Amply leafy trees to 20 m tall with smooth gray bark, the young branches, lf-stks, dorsal face of lf-axes and peduncles puberulent with fine yellowish gray hairs to 0.15-0.3 mm, the lf-buds brown-tomentulose, the thin-textured Ifts bicolored, dark green above, paler beneath, either glabrous throughout, or glabrous ciliolate, or minutely puberulent along some Primary veins, the dense globose capitula of greenish tubular fls fasciculate (solitary) and arising sequentially in lf-axils either of annotinous branches below the hornotinous lvs or some in axil of coeval !vs, then fully immersed in foliage.
Stipules minute, 0.5(-?) mm, caducous. i-ii/6-8; lf-stks 3.5-8 cm, the petiole 3.5-5 em, the interpinnal segment, when present, 2-2.5 em; a sessile round nectary <0.7 mm diam between or shortly below each pinna-pair and similar but smaller ones on pinna-cachis near 14 furthest pairs of Ifts; rachises of one or further pinna-pair 8-15 cm, the ventrally keeled interfoliolar segments 12—25 mm; minute caducous paraphyllidia at top of each pinna-pulvinus; Ift-pulvinules subcontiguous on ventral side of rachis, 1-15 x 1,2-1.8 mm, transversely wrinkled; lfts distally accrescent, the blades abtusely rhombicto oblong-elliptic from inequilateral base, broadly shalJowly emarginate, the distal pair 3-6 x 2-3.2 cm, 1.5-2.3 times as long as wide; venation palmate and pinnate, the finely prominulons, straight or slightly recurved midrib a little forwardly displaced, the 2-5 posterior ones weaker, the inner faintly brochidodrome near or short of midblade, all repeatedly branching into a fine reticulum prominulous on both faces. per node, 5,5-10 cm, charged above middle with a small ventrally concave bract; capitula 50-80- fld, the sessile fis spreading in all directions from the globose receptacle, homomorphic; bracts spatulate, 1 mm or less, caducous; perianth 5-merous, glabrous except for brown-puberulent calyx-teeth and tip of corolla-lobes; calyx campanulate 1.4-2.6 x 0.9-1.1 mm, the depressed-deltate teeth 0.1-0.2 mm; corotla tubular, slightly dilated distally, 7.2-9.7 mm, the erect ovate lobes 0.4-0.9 mm; androecium 32—46-merous, 13-16.5 mm, the stemonozone <1 mm, the tube 7-9 mm; ovary sessile, linear-ellipsoid, glabrous, style a little exserted.
Frat unknown.
In forest, sometimes on river banks, near 900 m, on E slope of the Bolivian Andes in Nor-Yungas near 16°10'-35'S (Coroico, Rio Bopi), — Map 16. — FI.
VILI-XI. Cojoba beckit is most closely related to C. chazutensis (Fig. 3).
However, until the fruit is known there will remain a trace of doubt as to the generic position of C. beckii, but its spherical capitula of narrow tubular flowers and the general aspect of its foliage and inflorescence appear to us decisive, The relatively few and ample leaflets distinguish C, beckéi abruptly from allopatric C. chazutensis, and even further from C. arborea vat. angustifolia, which occurs also in the Yungas.
Cojoba beckii was collected first by Rusby in 1921.
It is named in honor of Dr.
Stephan G. Beck of the National Herbarium at La Paz, whose collections of Bolivian Leguminosae have greatly enriched the herbarium at NY.
A taxon starts here.
Cojoba chazutensis (Standley) L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46: 507.
1991.
Pithecolobiwn chazutense Standley, Publ. Field Mus. Nat. Hist., Bot. Ser. 22: 45, 1940. — "Peru: In forest, Chazuta, Rio Huallaga, Dept. San Martin, alt. about 260 meters, March, 1935, G. Kiug 4011."
— Holotypus, F isotypi, CAS!, K!, MO 1711048! & i111049!, NY!, UC 204131.
Unarmed, amply multifoliolate trees +15-30 m, with trunk attaining 9 dm dbh, the young stems, lf-axes and peduncles densely pilosulous with brown or sordid-gray hairs to +).
15-0.25 mm, the lys bicolored, the thin-texmred Ifts dark-olivaceous sublustrous above, paler beneath, either glabrous on both faces and microscopically ciliolate or puberulent also along midrib on upper face, the dense spherical capitula of greenish cream, white-stamened fls pedunculate, either solitary or fasciculate by 2-4, in the axil of several coeval or new-fallen lvs immersed in foliage.
Stipules caducous from small pallid scar, the blade not seen, probably very smail, certainly either ephemeral or obsolescent.
Lf-formuta lf-stks 7-14 cm, the petiole +1.5-3.5 cm, at middle 1.4-2.2 mm diam, obscurely sulcate ventrally, the longer interpinnal segments 13-21 mm; a sessile, round, cupular thick-rimmed nectary 0.7-1.1 mm diam at insertion of each pinna-pair and a similar but smaller one on 34 furthest interfoliolar segments of pinnarachises; pinnae proximally decrescent, the rachis of distal ones 7—-10.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 6-8 mm; Ift-pulvinules contiguous on ventral face of pinna-rachis, 0.5-1 x 0.7-1.2 mm, transversely wrinkled, the Ifts appearing sessile; Ifts strongly decrescent toward base of rachis, thence (except for broader terminal pair) subequiform, in outline lance-oblong from strongly inequilateral, shallowly semicordate base, broadly obtuse but excentrically mucronulate, the larger ones 14-23 x 6,5— 9 mm, 2.2-2.7 times as long as wide; venation weakly palmate and then indistinctly pinnate, the slightly forwardly displaced midrib incipiently sigmoid, the innermost of 3-4 posterior primary nerves brochidodrome well short of midblade, the outer ones progressively shorter, the whole venation immersed or nearly so on upper face of blade, tenuously raised on lower face, the sinuous reticulum of venules scarcely perceptible.
Peduncles 2.5-6 cm, charged above middle with a thick-texcured ovate bract +1 mm, capitula to 60-fld, the (sub)sessile homomorphic fils in all directions from a globose receptacle at anthesis 2-2.5 mm diam, bracts spatulate +1 mm, brownish-pilosulous distally, deciduous; perianth 5-merous, glabrous except for minutely brownpuberulent tip of calyx-teeth and coroila-iobes, the latter ciliolate with small pallid clavate trichomes; calyx campanulate 1.8-2 x 1.1-1.5 mm, cuneately contracted into a solid base, the depressed-deltate teeth 0.1-0.2 mm; corolla tubular, faintly 5-nerved, 9-11 mm, distally a little dilated, the spreadingascending ovate lobes +1.2 x 1 mm; androecium (of 2 fls examined) 48-merous, 15.5 mm, the stemonczone +] mm, the tube 9 mm; ovary sessile, linearellipsoid, glabrous; stigma poriform; ovules +12, Pods (J. Schunke 2997, NY; D. N, Smith 13805, NY) moniliform, contorted, the seminiferous segments +#10-12 x 8-10 mm, separated by narrow isthmi, the fleshy red valves becoming stiffly leathery and rugulose when dry; dehiscence and seeds of C, arborea.
In terra firme forest at +200-900 m, apparently local in Amazonian Peru and in adj. Bolivia and SW Brazil in lat, 6°-15°20'S: in Peru on the Huallaga and Ucayali rivers in prov. San Martin of dept.
San Martin (Chazuta), prov. Corone! Portille of dept.
Loreto (Pucallpa) and prov. Pachitea of dept.
Hudnuco Nacional de Iparia; of Pto. Inca); in Bolivia on Serrania del Pilén Lajas, in Ballivian province of dept.
Beni; and in Brazil on Rio Macahua in state of Acre Sena Madureira), — Map 16. — Fl. LII(-?). — Aguano pashace (in Huénuco).
Cojoba chazutensis is readily distinguished in the Andean region by leaf-formula alone; see our key for details. in leaf-formula it resembles several species of Central America, specifically C. graciliflora and C. costaricensis.
It can be distinguished from C. graciliflora both by spatulate (not linear or linear-elliptic) bracts and by pinna-rachis with stalked glands.
Cojoba costaricensis more closely approaches C. chazutensis: both have stalked glands on the pinna-rachis, but those of C. costaricensis are between the leafletpairs, not some distance below them as in C. chazutensis.
Furthermore, the leaflets in C. chazutensis are broadly obtuse and excentrically mucronulate, whereas those of C. costaricensis are acuminate.
The flowers of C. chazutensis are usually somewhat smaller than those of C. costaricensis, having a calyx 1.8-2 mm and a corolla 9-11 mm; the calyx of C. costaricensis is 2-4 mm and the corolla 11-15 mm.
Were the taxa sympatric one could take them for variants of one species.
The widely disjunct distribution, however, does not lend credence to this idea.
A taxon starts here.
6.
Cojoba costaricensis Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl. 23: 31.
1928. — "Costa Rica.
Type from La Palma, 1459 m. altitude, 1898, Tonduz 12503.' — Holotypus, US 366004!; isotypi, NY (fragm.)!, US 355509!. — Pitheceilobien costaricense (Britton & Rose) Standley, Trop.
Woods 34: 40, 1933.
Pithecellobium costaricensis sensu Zamora, 1991: 131.
Tree to 8 m tall, the trunk attaining 60 cm dbh, the bark apparently red-brown, with white pustularcrateriform lenticels, the young branches and buds densely red-brown-pubescent, the buds velvety, the leaf-axes and peduncles golden-blondto blond-redpubescent, the hairs on all parts mostly ascendingerect, ascending-appressed, or erect 0.2-0.4 mm long, the Jeaves bicolored, the ample, relatively coarse-textured leaflets dark green above, paler beneath, the solitary capinula of white flowers axillary to coeval leaves, or at efoliate nodes on annotinous branches, hence either immersed in or surpassed by the foliage.
Stipules deltate or thickened and deltoid, 0.75-1.25 mm, fugacious, present only at inception of leaves.
Lf-formula the Lf-stk 6.5-19.5 cm, the petiole 1.4-4.2 cm, the interpinnal segments 0.7-2.4 cm, the proximally semi-terete to more or less dorsiventrally flattened lf-stk charged between first pinna-pair with a stalked-poriform nectary 0.5-1 mm diam and 0.5—1 mm tall, similar but smaller nectaries present between subsequent pinnapairs and between some if not all Ift-pairs, the pinnapulvinus most commonly surmounted by a similar nectary and a Ift-pair, if not immediately surmounted by such then the first [ft-pair accompanied by a stalked nectary, or if nectary rarely lacking then Ifts usually present at apex of pinna-pulvinus, the pinnapulvinus only rarely lacking Ifts and nectary; Iftpulvinules of each Ift-pair subcontiguous on ventral side of pinna-rachis, 0.4-0.7 mm, moderately galdenbrown-puberulent, transversely obscurely wrinkled; Ifts more or less sessile against rachis, decrescent proximally, thence subequilong to decidedly distally accrescent, the blade asymmetrically lance-elliptic or lance-ovate from an inequilaterally semicordate base, the apex acuminate, those near distal end (excluding terminal pair) (4-)6-20 x 3-7 mm, (1.3-)2.3-4.6 times longer than broad; venation pinnate-palmate, the subcentric midrib distally falcate, the 1 or 2 nerves from pulvinule fading or brochidodrome well below midblade, the secondary venation prominuious on both faces, the tertiary venation obscure on upper surface, faint and immersed on lower.
Peduncles solitary, 2-8 cm, charged or not near middle with a coarse, thickened, deciduous bract, capitula 38-53- flowered, the subsessile homomorphic flowers spreading in all directions from a (sub)globose receptacle 4-6 mm long; the fugacious bracts (very few seen) proximally obtriangular, distally spatulate, 0.5-0.75 mm, the tip incurved and somewhat thickened, dorsally red-pubescent, perianth greenish when dried, described as white on tree, externally glabrous save for the always red-pubernlent calyx-lobes; calyx cylindric, at least faintly S-nerved, 2-4(-4.75) mm, the unequal, depressed-deltate teeth 0.1-0.4 mm; corolla cylindrical-campanulate, mm, the ascending or arcvate-reflexed, ovate or triangular lobes unequal, 1-2 mm, at tip internally thickened and under magnification cucullate, androecium 27-45-merous, 16-23 mm, the stemonozone 1-2.5 mm, the staminal tube 8-10.5 mm, shorter than corolla, lacking a nectarial disc; ovary (sub)sessile, slenderly ellipsoid, glabrous, the style equal to or slightly surpassing the stamens, the stigma poriform, Pods 1 or 2 per capitulum, pendulous, (sub)moniliform from a stipitate base, the body 3-12-seeded, 3.5-15 cm long and 0.9-1.2 cm wide over seed-cavities, the isthmi 2-10 mm long, the orange-red valves finely to coarsely wrinkled and minutely sparingly golden-pubervlent over seedcavities, smoother and more densely puberulent near to and over the isthmi, the endocarp smooth, light brown; dehiscence through both sutures, the valves upon dehiscence scarcely or strongly coiled andlor twisting and narrowly gaping to expose seeds one at a time, these held on a short, straplike, fragile funicle; seeds ovoid to ellipsoid +1 cm diam, or cllipsoid +10-11 x 7-9 x 5-7 mm, the blue-black seed-coat coarsely but sparingly wrinkled, fragile, adherent to the greenish embryo.
Confined to wet forests, at 900-1900 m, of the Cordillera Central of Costa Rica. — Map 17. — Fl, and fr. nearly throughout the year, blooming anew while mature fruit are still on the tree,
A taxon starts here.
7.
Cojoba sophorocarpa (Bentham) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fi.
23: 31.
1928.
Pithecolobiwn suphorocarpum Bentham i Bentham & Hooker, Gen. Pl. 1: 598.
1865. — ".
.
. ex America — Lectotypus (L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46: S11.
1991), labeled "In monte Pantasmo in Segovia [Nicaragua], Januario legi 1848.
Oersted s.n."
, KI. — Feuitleea sophorocarpa (Bentham) O. Kuntze, Revis.
Gen. PI. 1: 189.
1891, Shrubs or trees to 10 m tall, the vegetative buds densely red-brown-velvety with erect-ascending hairs 0.2-0.3 mm long, the stems, dorsal side of lf-axes, and peduncles similarly puberulent but with shorter hairs commonly biond instead of red, the lvs bicolored, the thin-textured Ifts dark-green sublustrous above, paler beneath, glabrous save for the sometimes ciliate margins and pilosulous midvein on upper surface, the capitula of white flowers solitary, either axillary to coeval leaves and immersed in foliage, or at efoliate nodes of annotinous branches, or cauliflorous on old wood.
Stipules fugacious, those at inception of leaves asymmetrically triangular, deltoid, or linear-cylindric 0.75-3,5 mm.
Lf-formula ii-w/6-15, the semiterete or somewhat dorsiventrally flattened lf-stk 8,5—30 cm, the petiole 2.4-8.8 cm, the interpinnal segments 2-5.5 cm, the lf-stk charged between all pinna-pairs with a short-stalked-cupular or -crateriform, or mounded-poriform or ellipsoid nectary, the larger of these 0.75-2 mm diam, similar but smaller ones between first and furthest or between nearly all Ift-pairs, or lacking; pinnae subequilong or distally accrescent, the ionger ones 8.5-25 cm, the interfoliolar segments 7-25 mm, with paraphyllidia to 0.75 mm, or sometimes with tufts of hair on pulvinus; Ift-pulvinules broadly elliptic to falcately elliptic in outline, 0.75—-2 mm on long axis, coarsely wrinkled, glabrous or puberulent along midrib, the long axis inserted more ar less obliquely but parallel to the plane of the Jf and subcontiguous with opposite pulvinus the whole length, or basiscopically contiguous and acroscopically dorsally displaced; Ifts asymmetrically ovate-elliptic, or larger ones lancefrom an inequilaterally semicordate base, subequilong, or distally accrescent, the larger ones (excluding terminal pair) 2.46 x 0.9-3.1 cm, 1,3-3.2 times longer than broad, the apex acuminate and minutely apiculate, widely acute or deltate-acute, the venation pinnate-palmate, the subcentric or somewhat forwardly displaced midrib faintly or strongly distally falcate, the largest innermost of the 2-4 pasterior nerves expiring near or well short of midblade, the secondary and tertiary venation faint but visible on upper surface, prominulous on lower.
Peduncles 1 or 2 per node, often 3-5 at inception in lf-axils, but ali but 2 apparently abortive, equilong 1.8-13 cm, a thickened bracteole to 2 mm long present about % way up or lacking; capitula 46—126(!)-fld, the sessile homomorphic fls spreading in all directions from a globose or obovoid receptacle 2-4 mm diam or to 7 mm long; bracts slightly dimorphic, the proximal ones obtriangular 0.75-1 mm, distally becoming linearspatulate, 1-1.25 mm, ail distally somewhat thickened and densely red-brown-puberulent, all shorter than the fl-buds, deciduous or rarely same subpersistent under fruit, perianth (5-)6—-7-merous, thin-papery plurinerved, glabrous save for ted ascending-erect hairs on lobes of calyx and shorter blond-red hairs on corolla-lobes, the fls when dried often deceptively appearing minutely canescent due to red-splotchy epidermis; calyx cylindric, 2.5-5 x 1-2 mm, the unequal lobes elliptic-acute 0.2-0.6 mm; corolla very narrowly campanulate or cylindric-funnelform 8-18 mm, the ascending-erect, unequal lance-triangular to deltate lobes 0.75-1.75 mm, internally thickened and more or less cucullate; androecium 36-66-merous, 12-28 mm, the stemonozone 1.5-2.5 mm, the tube (6-)10-20 mm, shorter than, equal to, or much longer than corolla, coarse-thickened but lacking a nectarial disc; ovary subsessile ellipsoid, sometimes somewhat truncate, minutely puberulent at apex; style much surpassing stamens, stigma not seen.
Pods 1-2 per capitulum, (sub)moniliform or cylindric from a contracted stipelike base, straight or somewhat falcate, 4-15.5 cm long, 0.7-1.2 cm broad over seed-cavities, the bright red evenutose valves inconsistently wrinkled, internally lustrous pale-tan; dehiscence through both sutures, the valves coiling andlor twisting; seeds (sub)contiguous and mutually compressed-ovoid, or widely spaced and ellipsoid, 14-20 x 9-11 x 7-10 mm, not seen to persist on the funicle, when fully mature the black chartaceous seed-coat not particularly fragile, closely investing the dark-greenish embryo.
In cloud forest and swamp forest, 0-1400 m, from the Sierra Madre de Chiapas and the Meseta de Chiapas in Chiapas and immediately adj. Tabasco, Mexica, S into Panama; not known from Belize, El Salvador, or interior Honduras. — Map 18. — Fl. XI-IV; soon after, the ft. apparently long-persistent on the tree. — Muk'ul ib'te (Mexico, Tzeltal), In the northern part of the distribution, feaves of C. sophorocarpa have a nectary on the petiole as well as between the pinna-pairs, but none between the first leaflet-pair.
The leaflets of these specimens average 1.3-2.5 times longer than broad, and the flowers are 8-13 mm long. These were separated as C. haematoloba L. Rico.
South of Mexico, individuals lack the nectary on the petiole but have one between the first pair of leaflets.
The leaflets of these are 2.5-3.2 times than broad, and the flowers are (12-)13-18 mm long. These belong to C. sophorocarpa sensu stricto.
Jn Nicaragua and Guatemala, so many exceptional or intermediate collections are known that even varietal status for C. Aaematoloba is unjustified.
A taxon starts here.
8.
Cojoba rufescens (Bentham) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl .
23: 32.
1928. inga rufescens Bentham, London I. Bot, 4; 585.
1845. — "In an island off the coast of Veragua [Panama], — Holotypus, K!. — Feuilieea rufescens (Bentham) 0.
Kuntze, Revis.
Gen. PL 1: 189, 1891. — Pithecolobiun rufescens (Bentham) Pittier, Contr. U.S. Natl. Herb. 18: 181.
1916.
Amply foliate unarmed arborescent shrubs and trees (3-)4-15 m, with smooth gray bark, the new stems, lf-axes and peduncles nearly always pilosulous and the lf-buds tomentulose with either straight spreading or tangled incurved, yellowish or bronze hairs to 0.15-0.4 mm, the lvs simply paripinnate, the papery Ifts bicolored, olivaceous and often sublustrous on upper face, paler on lower, usually glabrous except for puberulent midrib and sometimes puberulent secondary nerves but rarely (especially when young) thinly pilosulous on one or both faces and sometimes fully glabrate in age, the dense globose capitula of greenish white—stamened fls arising singly or in fascicles of 2-3 in or immediately above the axil of several coeval or new-fallen lvs, immersed in foliage.
Stipules submembranous I-nerved caducous, absent from many specimens, either triangular-subulate 0.5-1.5 mm or linear-lanceolate 2-5 mm.
Lf-formuda O/(1-) 2-9; Lf-stks (0.6-)2.5-16(-17) cm, the petiole ing or almost reduced to the stout pulvinus) 4.5-40 mm, usually much shorter and never longer than the longest interfoliclar segment, this 1.4-4.7 cm; a sessile, either round, elliptic or bluntly 3-angulate, either dimpled or cupular thick-rimmed nectary (0.3-)0.4-2 mm diarn at insertion of each lft-pait: pulvinules (1-) 1.5-5 x 0.8-1.7 mm, cross-wrinkled; lfts strongly accrescent distally, either elliptic, broadly elliptic, ovateor abovate-elliptic from subequilaterally cuneate or postically rounded base, either obtuse or very shortly bluntly acuminate, the furthest pair 5—36.5 x 2.2-11 cm, 1.7-4.5 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the subcentric, either straight or gently portect midrib giving rise on each side to major (and random intercalary) secondary nerves widely ascending-incurved to anastomosis well within the undulately crisped or almost plane margin and then to a fine lax reticulum of venules, the whole venation sharply prominulous on lower face of Ifts, less so on upper, or the major veins there shailowly depressed and the reticulum scarcely perceptible.
Peduncles 4-50 mm, bearing near middle or close under the globose capitulum 1(—2) ovate or linear-lanceolate bracts 14 mm, the subspherical receptacle +2-4 mm diam, this charged either with more or jess elongate linearlanceolate or with shorter linear-spanulate, persistent bracts 1-5.5 mm, these either shorter than or far surpassing the immature fl-buds; capitula densely +25- 80-fld, the homomorphic fls radiating in al! directions, sessile; perianth 5-merous, thin-textured (fragile when greenish, glabrous externally except for brownpuberulous tip of calyx-teeth and corolla-lobes; calyx either deeply narrowly campanulate or a little dilated beyond middle and turbinate-campanulate (1.3-) x 0.8-1.6 mm, the often incurved, deltate, depressed-deltate, or subtruncate teeth 0.1-0.4 mm, corolla tubular, slightly dilated distally, 6.5-9.5 mm, the ascending ovate lobes 0.6-2 mm; androecium 15-32-merous, 10-18 mm, the stemonozone 0.6—1.25 mim, the tube (3.5-)4—7 mm, not callous at base; ovary (sub)sessile, narrowly oblong-ellipsoid, glabrous but sometimes micropuberulent after fertilization; style shortly exserted, the stigma poriform.
Pods essentially as in C, arborea, either subterete and shallowly indented between seeds or (when longer) moniliform, 5.5-14 x 0,9-1,5 cm, 8-13-seeded, the black, plumply ellipsoid, at first lustrous but when dried dull and wrinkled seeds 8.5-11 x 6-7 mm.
In moist thickets and forest, on riverbanks and lakeor seashores, from near sea level to +1600 (2100) m, Socaliy plentiful, centr. Costa Rica (San José) E through Panama, on the Pacific slope (except at the Isthmus) and off-shore islands, to N Chocé, Colombia. — Map 16. — FI. primarily but randomly at other times.
Cojoba rufescens is unique in the simply pinnate leaves, which are suggestive of Inga, though assaciated with the red moniliform dehiscent fruit of Cojoba.
While readily recognized by its foliage, it varies greatly in number, size, and pubescence of leaflets, in length of floral bracts, and in length of peduncles; furthermore, it is at home both in lowland and coastal forest and, in westerm Panama and Costa Rica, at elevations to 2100 m on the south slope of the Cordillera, which suggests ecological differentiation.
However, despite the number of names proposed for various forms, we have not found significant correlation between the variable features or between these and habitat, and therefore propose a comprehensive specific concept which may yet yield, with attentive field study, some taxonomically useful infraspecific units, Pittier, who was the first to discover the true generic affiliation of four species of Inga described by Bentham, maintained only two of them, rufescens and tubulifera.
He failed to mention specific differences and referred them erroneously to Pithecolobium sect. Caulanthon, that is to say to the modem genus Zygia.
Britton and Rose (1928, in Cojoba) could distinguish Pittier's two species only by overlapping characters of leaflet number and size.
These characters of the leaflets are weakly linked; for example, the population at Valle de San Antén in the province of Coclé, Panama, segregated as P. rufescens vat, vallense Schery, has the few (3-4 jugate) leaflets proper.to rufescens sensu stricto but in the low sizerange proper ta subulifera sensu stricto.
Flora! bracts 1-1.5 mm, +2 mm, and to 4 mm have been found close together, on plants with essentially identical foliage, within the confines of Barro Colorado Island.
The extremes of pubescence are notable, but almost ali known examples of the species, of whatever leaf-formula, have puberulent primary venation of the leaflets, and all, without exception, have leafbuds clothed in dense brown or bronze indumentum.
The form with glabrous or nearly glabrous leaflets relatively few in number, independently described (cf. Woodson & Schery, 1950) by Bentham as inga membranacea, by Britton as Cojoba glabra, and by Standley as Pithecolobium davidsoniae, is apparently a submontane variant found only in western Panama and Costa Rica and may deserve varietal status.
A remarkable form with leaf-stalks reduced to the petiole and only one pair of leaflets to 9 em Jong is represented by a collection from Chocé (A. Ferndndez 360, NY).
Another from Costa Rica (4.
Zamora 4263, NY) has a leaf likewise reduced to the petiole and one pair of leaflets to 11 cm long on the same branch with leaves with two pairs of leaflets.
This is likewise repeated, though with smaller leafets, on Sytsma & D'Arcy 3636 Numerous collections with leaves reduced to two pairs of leaflets are known from Panama.
Cojoba whitefoordiae L. Rico was said to differ from C. rufescens in its larger leaflets, ferrugineoushirsutulous peduncles, and persistent cymbiform floral bracts.
We have found that none of these characters serve to distinguish the two taxa.
Cojoba whitefoordiae was said to have leaflets 14.5-24 cm long; those of C. riufescens 5-10 cm.
However, a number of specimens D. R. Harvey 5/92, F) have leaflets on flowering branchlets as short as 9.5 cm and as long as 17 cm.
Other specimens identifiable as whitefoordiae on the basis of floral bracts have leaves as short as 9.5 em.
The pubescence on the peduncies of both species is basically the same and, furthermore, is as variable within rufescens sensu stricto as it is between the two.
While it is true that the majority of the collections identifiable as rufescens do have linear or linearelliptic bracts, as opposed to the spatulate bracts of whitefoordiae, some have bracts linear at the base of the capitulum becoming spatulate near the apex.
Moreover, some have spatulate bracts throughout.
Collections that have leaf-stalks reduced to the petiole and only one pair of leaflets occur sporadically in both taxa, In the protologue, Cojoba undulatomarginata was compared to C, glabra (= rufescens), from which it was said to differ by the membranous leaflets with undulate margins, long, cylindric glands between the leaflet-pairs, and the long floral bracts that persist through fruiting.
Undulate leaflet-margins are occasionally seen on many ill-prepared collections of Cajoba, especially those with not yet fully mature leaflets, and are especially common on collections of C. rufescens.
The floral bracts are perfectly compatible with those of C. rufescens.
Only the long-stalked nectaries make C. undidatomarginata different from C. rufescens (though such are also found in several other species), but as far as known these are not duplicated in any other collection of pinnate-leaved Cojoba from Costa Rica and are not sufficient differpmne fae stannic
A taxon starts here.
9.
Cojoba graciliflora (Blake) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. FI.
23: 31.
1928.
Pithecellobium gracilifiorum Blake, Contr. Gray Herb. 52: 69.
1917. — "British Honduras: open ground, Toledo, 2 June 1907, M. E. Peck 922.' — Holotypus, GH!; isotypi F!, K!, NY!.
Small shrubs flowering at m or less to trees to 15 m tall, peduncles and young stems densely charged with long red, more or less straight hairs to 0.4-0.6 mm and puberulent with incurved-ascending or erect blond or blond-red hairs mm, the annotinous stems less so, the dorsal side of lf-axes moderately to densely pubescent with the blond or blond-red hairs, likewise the fruit, densely so along the sutures and the isthmi, sparingly so on the valves over the seedcavities, the bicolored, thin-textured to (larger ones) somewhat leathery ifts ample, green-lustrous on the upper surface, paler on the lower, glabrous or puberulent on midrib, the dorsal or both faces occasionally uniformly moderately red-blond-hispidulous, the capitula of white flowers 1-2 in the axils of coeval leaves.
Stipules narrowly lanceolate, linear or linearcylindroid, 1.5-5 mm, nearly always persistent until the If is fully expanded, commonly for some time after.
Lfformula (-)ii-w/7-18; the terete or semiterete lf-stks 1.9--15.2 cm, the petiole proper 0.9-3.3 cm, the longer interpinnal segments 1-3 cm, the lf-stk charged immediately above the pulvinus or between the first pinna-pair with a crateriform to short-stalked thick-rimmed cupular nectary 0.5-1.25 mm diam, one (or between pinna-pairs 2) similar but smaller nectary between all pinna-pairs, between ail ieaflet-pairs, and surmounting the pinna-puivinus, that on the pinnapulvinus accompanied by two linear paraphyllidia 0.5-0.75 mm long; pinnae at least slightly accrescent distally, the longer ones 5.5-15 cm long, the interfoliolar segments 4—14 mm; the Ift-pulvinules ovate or somewhat faleately broadly elliptic 0.5-1.5 mm on the long axis, coarsely wrinkled, glabrate or pubescent on dorsal side only, or on both sides; Ifts falcately or asymmetrically lance-elliptic, lance-ovate or ovate-elliptic from an inequilaterally broadly attenuate to somewhat semicordate base, distally accrescent except for the sometimes somewhat slightly smaller terminal pair, the longer ones 1.4-4,1 x 0.4-2 cm, 1,8-3.8 times longer than broad, the apex broadly acute or rounded, the subcentric midrib faintly or pronouncedly distally falcate; venation pinnate-palmate with 2-3 nerves from pulyinule brochidodrome well below midblade, the secondary and tertiary veins faint on the upper surface, prominent beneath and usuaily lightly brownish-discolored, Peduncles 3-7.6 cm, at any one node subequilong, though thase of different nodes on the same shoot often of widely disparate length, charged or not immediately below the capitulum or % of the distance up the peduncle with an ascending-incurved, usually somewhat thickened, lanceolate to ovoid-lanceolate bract 3-7 mm long, the globose capitulum 44-54flowered, the receptacle +2-3 mm diam, the linear or narrowly linear-elliptic red-pubescent bracts (1-)3-7.5 mm long, much longer than buds, persistent past anthesis and abscission of fls; perianth 5-merous, papery, glabrous save for pubescent calyxand corolla-lobes; calyx cylindrical-campanulate 2.5-5 mm, contracted to and thickened but not stipitate base more or less isodiametric with lower calyx-tube, the equilong to very unequal, usually densely red-pubescent lobes 0.25- 0.75 mm long; corolla narrowly cylindrical-campanulate or cylindrical-urceclate-campanulate (broadest below the throat) 9-16 mm long, the erect to gently arcuate but not reflexed, deltate or lance-deltate lobes subequilong or unequal 0.75—2 mm, densely or rarely rather sparingly red-blondor blond-pubescent; androecium 21-35-merous, 10-25 mm, the stemonozone 1.5-2.75 mm, the staminal tube 5-15 mm, usually included in corolla, very rarely exceeding it, ovary elliptic subsessile, glabrous overall or the apex minutely red-blond-puberulous, the style centric to slightly ventrally displaced, exceeding stamens; stigma poriform.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, moniliform or submoniliform 12-19 cm long, +0.7-1.3 cm over seed-cavities, when well fertilized 4-15-seeded, the isthmi nearly absent or to 1.5 mm long, the bright red valves externally evenulose, blond-red-puberulent particularly along sutures and in isthmi, much less so over seed-cavities, usually smooth, becoming coarsely wrinkled with age, internally pale tan-lustrous; dehiscence through both sutures, the valves twisting; seeds ellipsoid or ovoid-ellipsoid x 6-7 x 6-7 mm, only rarely somewhat mutually compressed, the shiny black seed-coat usually longitudinally striate when fresh, the striations or a rectangular pattern visible with magnification when dry, the papery but rather tough-resilient coat free from the embryo, at least in part, embryo straight, the eophyils densely long-red-pubescent.
Recorded nearly always in wet forest or along streams from sea level to 1600 m; on the Caribbean slope of the Cordillera in Central America from near Xalapa, Veracruz, S through Chiapas and Quintana Roo in Mexico, and more or less continuously through Guatemala, Belize, and Honduras into Nicaragua; not recorded from E! Salvador. — Map 17. — FI. nearly any time of year, apparently sometimes continuously throughout the year.
Cojoba graciliflora is particularly variable in leafformula, bract-length, and flower-length.
Pithecolobium tenellum, P. donnell-smithit, and the other species listed in synonymy were all based on extremes in one or another of these characters.
However, the variation in any of these is continuous, there is no correlation with geography, and variation in leaf-characters is great even on one individual.
For instance, flush leaves when present with late leaves are nearly always of a much higher leaf-formula.
In contrast, bract length and flower length are nearly consistent on any one individual.
A taxon starts here.
10.
Cojoba filipes (Ventenat) Barneby & Grimes, comb. nov. Inga filipes Ventenat, Mém.
Classe des sciences nat. et phys., Acad. Sci. Paris 1: 6.
1807 & Choix Pl. t. 38.
1807. — "Arbrisseau découvert 4 Saint Domingue par M. — Lectoholotypus, the cited plate, derived from a drawing made by Poiteau, probably on Hispaniola.
According to Britton's correspondence at NY (to F. W. Pennell, 22 Sep 1932), no typus could be found at P at that time.
In 1991, however, we found at P a Poiteau specimen from Santo Domingo with leaf-formula i-it/2-3, which may, despite relatively few leaflets, correspond with the wild plant, but this remains uncertain.
A flowering collection by Poiteau at G, derived from hb. Yentenat, also represents the paucifoliate phase (lf-formula ii/4; largest lft 5 x 3.6 mm) of the species, later described as Samanea valeuriana, and cannot be considered isotypic. — Pithecolobium filipes (Ventenat) Bentham, Trans.
Linn. Soc. London 30: 588.
1875.
Feuilleea filipes (Ventenat) O. Kuntze, Revis.
Gen. Pl. 1: 187.
1891. — Samanea filipes (Ventenat) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. FI.
23: 35.
1928.
Macrophyllidious érees 3-8 m, sometimes flowering as diffuse, densely branched shrubs 1-2 m, the older branches rough gray-barked, those of the current season together with Lfand inflorescence-axes pilosulous or puberulent with either widely ascending or incurved, sordid hairs to 0.1-0.25 mm, the foliage moderately bicolored, the stiffly papery Ifts when dry dull gray-olivaceous and smooth above, a little paler and venulose beneath, the few-fld capitula of narrow, almost glabrous fls pendulous cn filiform peduncle axillary to coeval Lvs, the large red subcylindric pods likewise pendulous.
Stipules triangular-subulate 0.2— 6.9 mm, at some (but not all) nodes thickened and persistent as conical points.
Lfformuta variable: i/2-3, 1/34, ii/3-6, the lfts 8-40 per Lf, relatively large when few and smaller when many; lf-stk (0.4—-)0.5— 5 cm, the petiole (0.4-)9.5-2.1 cm, the single (or longer) interpinnal segment 7-21 mm; lf-nectaries sessile, depressed-cupular with thickened rim, 0.5-1,3 mm diam, rarely bucket-shaped and as tall as diam, present between each pinna-pair but lacking on pinna-rachis except rarely between furthest pair of Ifts, rachis of the one or of the further pinna-pair (1.6-)2-6 em, the one or the longest interpinnal segment (6-)9-27 mm; lft-pulvinules in dorsal view 0.4-1.6 x 0.4-1.4 mm; Ifts both larger and proportionately wider upward along pinna-rachis, in outline inequilaterally obovate or oblong-obovate from semicordate base, broadly abtuse but apiculate at apex, the distal pair in well-developed lvs (1.8-)2-5(-5.5) x 1,1-3.1 em, 1.3- 1.8(-2) times as tong as wide; primary venation of 3-5 nerves from pulvinule, the strong midrib a litcle excentric, either straight or gently curved forward, giving rise on each side to 4-7 widely ascending major (and random weak intercalary) secondary nerves brochidodrome well within the weakly revolute margin, the innermost of the 2-4 posterior primaries incurved to anastomosis near or beyond midblade, the tertiary venulation weak and irregular, al! venation immersed or almost so on upper face, sharply prominulous beneath.
Peduncles solitary 3,5-11 cm, 0.3-0.4 mm diam; capitula 6—20-fld, the obovoid or globose receptacle 1.5-2 mm diam; bracts ovate 0.4-0.5 mm, brownish-puberulent, subpersistent; perianth 5- merous, glabrous except for microscopically ciliolate calyx-teeth and tip of corolla-lobes, pallid-greenish; calyx deeply narrowly campanulate 2.2-3.5 x 0.7-1 mm, the deltate, often unequal teeth to 0.2-0.3 mm: corolla slenderly cylindric, scarcely dilated upward, 10.5—14 mm, the lance-ovate lobes 1.1-2 x 0.7—-1 mm; androecium 30-38-merous, +24-25 mm, the stemonozone mm, the tube 9.5-13.5 mm, a little longer or shorter than corolla; style exserted from stamens, the stigma poriform 0.1 mm diam. Pods cylindric, straight or slightly recurved 14-21 x 1.1-1.5 em, conically contracted at each end, very slightly constricted between seeds, the cavity continuous and the 9-12 seeds contiguous within it, the valves red and fleshy when fully formed, +1.7—2 mm thick in section, when Tipe becoming reddish-tan and brittle-papery, the sutures visible externally but immersed; dehiscence through both sutures, the valves shriveling; seedfunicles straight terete, descending parallel to the pod's suture, +4 x 0.6 mm; seeds squatly cylindric, obliquely truncate at each end (where compressed by the seed above and below) 1.5-2 cm long and 1.1-1.5 cm diam, the testa papery brown venulose scarcely 0.1 mm thick in section, tightly investing the massive whitish embryo, tacking pleurogram; cotyledons planoconvex, the flat inner faces closely appressed, concealing the radicle and small! plumule.
On wooded hillsides and banks of ravines, commonly, perhaps exclusively on serpentine bedrock, 50-1400 m, interruptedly widespread in Hispaniola, rather frequent along the N slope from dept, NordQvest in Haiti E to prov. El Seibo in Dominican Republic, S in Haiti to Massif de la Selle and in Dominican Republic to Sa. Prieta N of Sto, Domingo in Distrito Nacional. — Map 19, — Fl. VSI-X, the full season little known, Cojoba filipes is scattered over much of Hispaniola (Map 19), where conditions are suitable, but the populations are localized by bedrock preference and seem to have undergone minor genetic drift expressed in modifications of leaf-formula, as described above.
These variations in pinnaand leaflet-number are not correlated with change in other organs or with overall dispersal, Liogier (1985: 69-70) recognized, nevertheless, two species of Samanea characterized by leaf-formulae of i-ii/2-5 = S. filipes and i/3 key) or i/2-6 description) = valeuriana, figures that defeat their diagnostic purpose.
The isotype of Pithecalobium impressum Urban that we have cited in the synonymy was recognized by Britton as a sterile twig of Cojoba filipes.
Inga filipes was referred by Bentham (1875) to Pithecolobium sect. Samanea set.
Coriacea, a concept sufficiently elastic as to include the Rain Tree along with the Cojobae known at that time, and Adbizia pedicellaris.
Britton to the genus Samanea, presumably on the basis of Ventenat's description and illustration of the pod, for na fruiting specimens were then available.
In associating the species with Pithecolobium sophorocarpum and P. Jilicifotium (Cojoba arborea of this revision), Bentham made a shrewd guess as to ils real affinities.
The capitula and individual flower of Inga filipes are perfectly compatible with Cojoba, in which the plant is anomalous only in its coriaceous (mature) leaflets and plumply cylindric pod containing a crowded column of obese, contiguous seeds.
Excellent examples of this fruit, both dried and preserved in spirits, collected by T. Zanoni in Santo Domingo, demonstrate the tue nature of the pod, which dehisces on the bough like that of other cojobas.
The packed cavity of the fruit, however, foreshadows the yet further modified species C. zanonii and C. bahorucensis, following, in which the obese seeds are vertically compressed into a column of discs.
The relationship of C. filipes to other members of its genus is similar to that of Zapoteca nervosa (Urban) H. Herndndez to other sections of Zapoteca.
Each species is somewhat isolated in its genus, is endemic to Hispaniola, and has undergone sclerophyllous adaptation to seasonally dry climate, acquiring in the process stiff glaucescent, prominently venulose leaflets.
They differ insofar that the Zapoteca is reported calciphile, whereas the Cajoba is apparently confined to soils derived from serpentine.
A taxon starts here.
11.
Cojoba zanonii (Barneby) Barneby & Grimes, comb. nov. Obolinga zanonii Barneby, Brittonia 41: 170, figs. 1, 2.
1989, — "DOMINICAN REPUBLIC.
PROV.
BARAHONA. en bosque nublado .
.
.
1400 m, E! Gajo, +7 km desde la carretera de Cabral a Polo .
.
.
18°7'5"N, 71°13'5"W, 18 Oct 1985 (fr), % Zanont (with R. Garcia) 35610."
— Holotypus, FBSD!; isotypi, A!, B!, F!, Gt, I!, Kt, P!, TL!, US!, Z!.
Fig. 4.
Pithecetlobiwn micranthum sensu Liogier, Fl. Espaflola 3: 64, 1985, ex parte (Holdridge 1271), exclus. descr. et typo (qui = Acacia aeutfera Bentham).
Obolinga zanonii sensu Zanoni, Brittonia 41: 175-177.
1989 (natural history, dispersal, ecology); sensu Mejia & al., Moscosoa 8: 41.
1994, Broad-crowned microphyllidious trees 4-15 m with trunk attaining 1 m dbh, the lfand inflorescence-axes sordidly puberulent with hairs to 0.2-0.4 mm, the Ifts glabrous or minutely ciliolate, the capitula of smail whitish fls solitary in lf-axils of homotinous branchlets.
Stipules triangular-cupulate 0.4-1.2 mm, either deciduous or persistent as lignified points. (iii lf-stk of langer lvs 3.5-10 cm, the petiole 5-13 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 5-16 mm, the ventral groove continuous or weakly bridged; nectary contiguous to first pinna-pair cupular thick-rimmed 0.7-1.3 mm diam, random similar but smalter nectaries between some or all distal pairs; pinnae proximally shorter, the rachis of longest ones +40-65 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.5—2.5 mum; lfts subsessile, decrescent at very ends of pinnarachis, elsewhere subequilong, the blades narrowly lance-oblong from semicordate base, apiculate, either straight or a lite curved forward, the longer ones (4.5-)5-9 x 1,4-3 mm, +3-4 times as long as wide, all veinless or almost so above, beneath carinate by midrib forwardly displaced to divide blade +1:2, 1-2 short posterior primary nerves sometimes faintly raised or discolored beneath, Peduncles (2.5-)3.5-6.5 cm, Ibracteolate shortly below capimlum, the receptacle globose 2-2.5 mm diam; bracts 0.5-0.7 mm, tardily deciduous; fls homomorphic 5-merous, the perianth glabrous except for minutely pubenilent calyx-teeth and corolta-lobes; calyx campanulate short-toothed +2.3-1,3 mm; corolia subcylindric 5-6.5 mm, the erect, ovate, often unequal lobes 0.7-1.5 mm; androecium 30-35-merous 9.5-11 mm, the included tube 3--3.5 mm; ovary sessile, glabrous at anthesis, 11—15- ovulate, Pods mostly solitary, pendulous, sessile, shortly cylindric or a trifle compressed, straight or slightly decurved 4.5-8(-9) x (1.6-)1.8-3(-3.8) cm, the reddish valves fleshy smooth but yellowishpuberulent overall, prior to dehiscence 2-5 mm thick in section, withering brown leathery wrinkled glabrescent and only +1 mm thick, dehiscent after falling by separation along the ventral or along both sutures, the cavity continuous; seed-funicles lance-ovate +3 mm; seeds transverse, stacked broadside in a cylindric file, the one al each end of the cavity bluntly conical, the test discoid (some not fully discoid), in broad view 20-28 mm diam, at the flattened periphery 4-8 mm thick, the thinly papery testa at first smooth lustrous brown but wrinkled and dull after exposure, on each face 4-nerved, lacking pleurogram.
In disturbed cloud forest, 1400-1900 m, localized on and near the crest of Massif de la Selle in Haiti (dept. de I'Quest) and Sa. de Bahonico in SW Dominican Republic (Barahona), Not mapped. — Fl. Y-VIIL, fr.
VI-I. Cojoba zanonii and C. bahorucensis, next following, closely resemble each other in persistence of some stipules as lignified conic points, 4-nerved seed-testa, and for an idiosyncratic fruit more like that of C. filipes: sausage-shaped, nearly terete fruit stuffed with obese seeds, these horizontal to the fruit's long axis on (in C. zanonit) lance-ovate funicle and compressed into discs as wide as the pod-cavity (20-28 mm) but only 4-8 mm thick.
The status of Obolinga as originally proposed has become untenable.
The phylogenetic analysis (Fig. 3) shows C. zanonii to be a derived member of Cojoba.
Its fruit, unique when first described, is now known also in C. bahorucensis, the peculiar coinlike seeds can be viewed as the fulfillment of a trend toward hypertrophy of the embryo initiated in C. filipes.
Studies of the pollen by P. Guinet and of wood by R. B. Miller, published immediately following the protelogue, demonstrated close similarity in these features between Cojoba sensu stricto and C. zanonii.
Nevertheless, C. zanonti, C. bakorucensis, and C. zanonii, all endemic to Hispaniola, remain, even without evidence from the fruit, extremely distinct in ecology, in leaf-formula, and in flowes-size.
A taxon starts here.
12.
Cojoba bahorucensis Grimes & R. Garcfa, sp. nov. Ut videtur C. zanonsi affinis, ei stipulis lignescentibus, legumine cylindrico seminisque testa chartacea nervosa similis, sed foliolis et floribus majoribus, legumine subduplo longiore necnon seminis testa luteo-viridi abstans. — "DOMINICAN REPUBLIC.
PROV, BARAHONA: Sierra de Bahotuco, +3 km al SO del Poblado de los Patos (Paraiso) - +350 m, 17°59'N, 719130, 11 Nov, 1994, R. Garcla, M. Mejia, S. Rodriguez, & J. Cicero 5670."
— Holotypus, FBSD; isotypi, K, NY, P, US; paratypus, loc. cit., "20 de Enero 1995, R. Garcia, D. Castifio, O, Perdono, & D. Hoener 5699," TBSD, NY.
Microphyllidious shrubs or trees to 5 m tall, the new growth densely, the peduncles and the dorsal face of the leaf-axes more sparingly covered with rusty, incurved, ascending or erect hairs +0.2 mm long, the thin-textured glabrous Ifts bicolored, dark green above, paler beneath, glabrous or minutely and sparingly ciliolate, the few-fld, globose capitula of ochroleucous fls solitary in the axil of a coeval If, or at defoliate nodes of homotinous branchlets, immersed in the foliage.
Stipufes at inception linear-lanceolate or -triangular, 1.75-2 x 0.5-0.75 mm, becoming ligneous with age and persistent as short spines.
Lf-formula \f-stks 3.7-8.3 cm, the petiole 0.9-1,3 cm, interpinnal segments 1-1.5 cm; a stalked cupular nectary +0.75 mm diam and 6.5 mm tall between the first pinna-pair, similar nectaries between subsequent pinna-pairs becoming sessile, and very small (<0.1 mm diam) nectaries sometimes perched on the ventral side of the pinna-pulvinus; pinnae proximally decrescent thence subequilong, the longer ones 2.7-6.5 cm, the ventrally keeled interfoliolar segments 1.5-2.25 mm; minute caducous paraphyllidia at the top of each pinnapulvinus or none; contiguous on the ventral side of the rachis, elliptic or nearly round 0.3— 0.6 mm diam, longitudinally wrinkled; lfts slightly crescent at each end of pinna-rachis, the blades elliptic to lance-elliptic from inequilateral base, acuminate or slightly apiculate, the larger ones at mid-rachis 9-11 x 1-1.5 mm; venation reduced to the prominulous, straight midrib, this distally displaced to divide blade +1:2.
Peduncles 4.2-4.4 cm, charged or not above middle with a small ventrally concave bract; capitula +15-fld, the subsessile homomorphic flowers not obviously radiating in all directions from the globose receptacle; bracts obovate-elliptic, ventrally concave, 1 mm or less, persistent at least past anthesis; perianth 5-merous, glabrous; calyx tubular 1.8-2.5 mm, contracted at base into a pseudopedicel +0,3 mm, the depressed-deltate to triangular teeth 0.1-0.3 mm; coroila narrowly campanulate, 8.3-8.7 mm, the erect to reflexed lobes 0.8-1 mm; androecium 40-43- merous, 13-13.5 mm, the tube 6-7 mm, the stemonozone lacking or at least <1 mm; ovary sessile, linearellipsoid, glabrous; style a little exserted; stigma capitate.
Pods similar to those of C. zanonii, solitary, pendulous, sessile though contracted at base, cylindric, shallowiy constricted between seeds, straight or slightly decurved 13.5-14.4 x 1.5-],8 cm, the green fleshy valves smooth, very sparingly yellowishpubenilent overall, glabrescent, +0,75 mm thick in section, the cavity continuous though slightly girdled between seeds, dehiscence unknown; seed-funicles very narrowly lance-ovate 3-3.5 mm, seeds transverse, stacked broadside in a file, those at each end bluntly conical, the rest plumply rhomboid-discoid to discoid, in broad view 1 !—-14 mm diam, at the periphery 9-14 mm thick, the testa smooth and lustrous, 1- nerved from hilum, 3—5-nerved at opposing pole, lacking pleurogram.
In relictual broadleaf woodland on limestone, with Ocotea, Guarea, Exothea, and Drypetes, 350 m, known only from the type locality in prov. Barahona, Dominican Republic.
Cojoba bahorucensis appears most closely related to C. zanomi, which it resembles in lignescent stipules, sausage-shaped fruit, and papery, nerved testa, but it differs in slightly larger leaflets and flowers, a pod more or less twice as long, and smaller seeds with yellow-green seed-coat.
Cojoba bahorucensis is unique in having pod-valves green at maturity, a reversion to an ancestral state.
Cojoba baherucensis is presently known from a population of 25 mature and juvenile individual trees in a temnant of primitive forest, most of which has been cut to provide space for agriculture and grazing.
It was probably much commoner formerly, but must now be considered an endangered species, threatened with extinction.
It is proper to the Sotobosque, on calcareous bedrock, in an area corresponding with subtropical moist forest, with about 1050-1350 mm annua! rainfall and mean annual temperature near 26°C (according to nearest meteorological stations).
A taxon starts here.
1.
Zygia claviflora (Bentham) Barneby & Grimes, comb. nov. Pithecolobium claviflorum Spruce ex Bentham, Trans.
Linn. Soc, London 30: 596.
1875 & in Martius, Fl. Bras. 15(2): 452.
1876. — "Habitat ad fl. Rio Negro in silvis 'Capoeiras' prope San Gabriel et in saxosis ad cataractas Panuré, ad Rio Vaupés: Spruce n.
2252, 2877."
— Lectotypus, Spruce 2252, K (hb. Bentham.)! = NY Neg. 2030; isotypi, K (hb. Hooker,)!, NY!, P(2 sheets)!; paratypi.
Spruce 2877, GOET!, K!, P!, — Feuilleea claviflora (Bentham) O. Kuntze, Revis.
Gen. Pl. 1: 187.
1891. — Abarema ciavifiora (Bentham) Kleinhoonte i Pulle, Fl. Suriname 2(2): 320, 1940. — Marmaroxylon claviflorum (Bentham) L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46; 515.
1991.
Pithecolobium claviflorum sensu Ducke, 1949: 44, ex parte (exclus, pl. e fl. SolimSes): Pitheceifobium claviflorum sensu C4rdenas, 1974: 126.
Slender multifoliolate cauliflorous trees (1.5—) 3-10 m with smooth terete branches, the young stems and all lf-axes densely brown-gold-pilosulous with stiffly erect hairs to mm, the thin-textured, dull olivaceous Ifts bicolored, pallid beneath, glabrous, the shortly pedunculate few-fld capitula arising for the most part in fascicles (but not pseudoracemose) from knots on annotinous and older wood, rately and randomly solitary and lateral to the axil of an older If; a loose cone of linear-attenuate scales in most I[f-axils and at tip of branchlets, Saipules erect or falcately erect, herbaceous but early dry paleaceous, linearlanceolate or narrowly lance-elliptic 2-9 x 0.3-2 mm, striately (1-)3-12-nerved, persistent but becoming dry and fragile, hence deciduous.
Lf-formula iv-vi/(10-) 12-18; lf-stks of larger lvs (4-)5,5-13 cm, the petiole including (ar consisting of) poorly differentiated pulvinus 2-6 x 1-2 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 11-23 mm, a sessile, shallowly cupular or almost plane, thick-rimmed nectary between the proximal pinna-pair 0.9-1.6 mm diam, smaller ones between most or only between the furthest pinna-pairs, and yet smaller, sometimes rudimentary cupular nectaries between all but a few proximal pairs of Ifts; pinnae strongly accrescent upward, the rachises of the furthest pair 4-8 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 3-6.5 mm, pulyinules subobsolete, the Ifts sessile against rachis, not readily disjointing when dry; Ifts decrescent at each end of or only at base of pinna-rachis, the first pair very unequal, those near and beyond mid-rachis narrowly oblong from obliquely truncate or very broadly flabellate base, nearly straight or commonly incurved beyond middle, sharply auriculate at pastetior basal angle, the larger ones 11-18 x (2.8-)3-5 mm, 3-4 times as long as wide; venation palmate and pinnate, the midrib subcentric, the innermost posterior primary nerve produced nearly to or well beyond midblade, the outer 2-3 very short or obscure, the secondary nerves from midrib all filiform, delicately prominulous or subimmersed.
Peduncles 0-5 mm, subtended by a rudimentary, bracteiform lf-stk with small cupular nectary, the capitula +4—9-fld, the axis <2 mm; fis sessile, the perianth either puberulent overall or almost glabrous, the corolla greenish white, the androecium red or pink distally; calyx campanulate x 0.8-1.2 mm, the teeth 0.1-0.2 mm; corolla 6-10 mm, the striate tube subcylindric, abruptly ampliate distally, the (4-)5 lobes 0.9-1.3 mm; androecium 24—44-merous, 21-33 mm, the stemonozone +1 mm, the slender tube 12-15 mm; ovary sessile, in profile linear, symmetrically conical at apex, +1,8—2 mm, at anthesis glabrous.
Pods (known from few, mostly immature or overmature samples) broadlinear, attaining 14 x 1.4 cm, the valves densely pilosulous overail with yellowish hairs; seeds not seen.
In rain forest, along non-inundated riverbanks and in rolling hill country, 120-250 m and on the slopes of Cerra Aracamuni in Venezuela to 600 m, localized on both slopes of the Orinoco-Rio Negro divide in NW Amazonas, Brazil (upstream on the Negro from +65°W and on the Vaupés to NE in Venezuela to SW state of Amazonas (N to base of Cerra Duida and dept.
Atures) and at the headwaters of Rio Caura in Bolivar. — Map 20, — FL IX-XII, TI-IV, the whole season poorly documented.
The epithet claviflora refers to the clovelike outline of the flower-buds, abruptly swollen in the short limb.
The species is distinguished in sect. Zygtopsis by the combination of striate stipnies, relatively smail, obtuse but mucronate leaflets, whitish flowers with pink tassel of filaments, and narrow pubescent pods, these, however, known as yet from few examples.
A taxon starts here.
2.
Zygia palustris Barneby & Grimes, sp. nov., habitu, indumento foliolisque submembranaceis pallide olivaceis hinc Z claviflorae illinc Z. basijugae affinis, a priori, quoad stipulas paleaceas striatim nervulosas congrua, foliolis fere duplo majoribus acutissimis 19-32 x 5-9 (nec obtusis mucronulatis 11-18 x 3-5) mm usque, necnon leguminis planocompressi valvulis +18 mm latis glaberrimis (nec 47.5 mm latis dense tomentulosis) absimilis, ab Z basijugae, quoad foliola acutissima et legumen elongatum utraque facie glaberrimum comparabili, stipulis autem plerumque lineari-lanceolatis 5-9 mm longis paleaceis pluristriatis (nec parvis triangularibus submembracaceis enerviis) necnon inflorescentiae monocephalae (nec pseudoracemosae) axi primaria obsoleta manifeste diversa. — VENEZUELA.
T. F Amazonas: uppermost Yatua, 100-140 m, 27.
X.1957 (fl.), B. Maguire (with J, Wurdack & C. Maguire) 41958. — Holotypus, NY. — Ibid.: between Rfos Mawarinuma and Baria, 0°52'N, 66°15'W, 8.
V.1984 (fr), A. Gentry (with B. Stein) 47265. — Paratypi, MO, NY.
Amply multifoliolate cauliflorous treelets 2-4 m, closely resembling Zygta basijuga in foliage and fruit but different in paleaceous striate stipules and distantly allopatric, the young stems and all 1-axes densely hispidulous with erect straight, yellowish or bronze hairs to 0,15—1 mm, the thin-textured, when dry curling and crumpling, glabrous Ifts olivaceaus above, pallid beneath, the short-pedunculate few-fld capitula solitary on very short peduncle, the primary inflorescence-axis greatly condensed or obsolete.
Stipules erect, narrowly lance-attenuate x 1,5 mm, early dry paleaceous, striately (3-)5-9- nerved, dorsally glabrous or (in Guyana) thinly pilosulous, persistent unless broken.
Lf-formufa iv-v/13-19; lf-stk of longer lvs 8.5-15 cm, the petiole (consisting largely of lf-pulvinus) 3.5-8(-14) x 2-3 mm, the longer interpinnal segments +25-40 mm; nectary between the short first pinna-pair cupular thick-rimmed 1-1.7 mm diam, similar ones between nearly all further pinna-pairs and yet smaller on pinna-rachis between all but a few proximal pairs of Ifts; pinnae abruptly decrescent proximally, not or scarcely so distally, the rachis of longer ones 7-13 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 6-9 mm, pulvinule of ifts obsolete, the blade sessile against pinna-rachis; Ifts strongly decrescent proximally, the first, very unequal pair arising next to pinna-pulvinus, the blades falcately narrow-oblong from obliquely truncate or very broadly inequilaterally flabellate, postically acuteauriculate base, incurved beyond middle and abruptly deltate-acuminulate and mucronate, the larger ones 19-32 x 5-9 mm, 2.9-4 times as long as wide; venation of Z, ctaviflora.
Pedunctes 1-6 mm, each subtended by a reflexed bract charged ventrally with a Small shallow-cupulat nectary; capitula 4-10-fld, the receptacle +1.5 mm; fls sessile, the 5-merous whitish perianth typically glabrous, but in Guyana sometimes thinly puberulent, everywhere campanulate, including short solid base 2-3.2 x 1-1.3 mm, the teeth 0.15-0.25 mm; corolla narrowly tubular-funnelform 10,5-13 mm, a Jittle ampliate in distal 4, the lobes 1.5-2.1 mm; androecium 50—56-merous, +24 mm, the stemonozone +1 mm, the slender tube 15-16.5 mm, the free filaments pink distally, ovary sessile linear 2-2.3 mm, obliquely conical at apex, at anthesis glabrous.
Pods (not seen fully ripe) pendulous, in profile broad-linear straight 17-20 x 1.8 cm, contracted at base into a stipelike neck 1.5-3 mm, obtuse at apex, 14-16-seeded, the thinly leathery, coarsely venulose, glabrous fuscous-brown valves framed by slightly dilated, almost straight, ciliolate sutures, low-colliculate aver each ovule; dehiscence and seed unknown.
Tn swampy forest and on riverbanks subject to flooding, 130-330 m, well known from the base of Cerra de la Neblina (headwaters of Rios Baria, Mawarinuma, and Yatua) in the state of Amazonas, Venezuela, and disjunct (but see discussion) on Kaieteur Plateau in centr. Guyana. —- Map 20. — FI. lll, V, X, XII, perhaps intermittently throughout the year.
Zygia palustris resembles Z. claviflora and Z, bastjuga in general aspect and especially in the pallid foliage of thin texture that retains its olivaceous coloring when dried, It further resembles the distantly allopatric, upper Amazonian Z, basijuga in the sharply mucronate incurved tip of the leaflets and in the elongate pod glabrous except for ciliolate sutures.
It differs from Z basijuga, however, in long paleaceous, striately nerved stipules, in the suppressed primary axis of the pseudoraceme, and in the pink, not white tasse! of free filaments.
The stipules of Z palustris are nearly those of the almost sympatric Z, claviffora, but the pods, as contrasted in the key to species, are fundamentally different.
The leaflets of Z. claviflora are smaller than those of Z palusiris and only minutely mucronate at the deltately obtuse apex.
Typical Z. from the base of Cerro de la Neblina has glabrous stipules and perianth.
One collection from Guyana (Cowan & Soderstrom 2013, K, NY, not mapped) has thinly pilosulous stipules and perianth but appears otherwise identical.
A second (1879, wn Thurn, K), from Kaieteur savanna, mentioned by Sandwith in the protologue of Pitheceifobium collinwn, seems conspecific.
Their identity needs confirmation from fruiting material, but they cannot, we think, represent the related and closely sympatric Z. potaroénsis, which see for comment.
A taxon starts here.
3.
Zygia potaroensis Barmeby & Grimes, sp. nov., Z claviflorae affinis et stipulis paleaceis striatim nervulosis ei simillima, sed foliorum pinnis numerosis (8-9-, nec 4-6-jugis), foliolis minoribus (7.5-10, nec 11-18 mm usque longis) et praesertim legumine latiori, maturo septis interseminalibus perfectis pracdito insigniter diversa.
A Z. palustri, in Guyana proxime sympatrica, foliorum formula foliolisque dimidio vei ultra minoribus distantus videtur. — GUYANA: in forest along trail from Kaieteur Falls to Tukeit, 2.1I1.1962 (fr), &.
S. Cowan & T, R, Soderstrom 2016. — Holotypus, NY; isotypus, K. Slender microphyllidious, cauliflorous sreelets 2-6 m tall, the young stems and all lf-axes densely pilosulous with erect yellow-brown hairs +0.6-0.95 mm, the lvs bicolored, the thin-textured Ifts olivaceous above, not brunnescent in drying, pallid beneath, glabrous.
Stipules paleaceous lanceolate 6-15 x 1,2-2 mm, Striately 9-13-nerved, persistent at tip of branchlets.
Lf-formuia vitiix/] 5-19, lf-stks 8-15 cm, the petiole including poorly differentiated pulvinus 5-23 x 1-1.4 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 10-16 mm; nectary between or close below the proximal pinna-pair shallowly cupular thick-rimmed 1-1.8 mm diam, a similar, only slightly smaller one at tip of lf-stk, those on pinna-rachises minute or 0; pinnae proximally decrescent, the rachis of longer distal ones 4-6 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments to mm, Iftpulvinules subobsolete, the blades sessile against rachis; lfts abruptly decrescent near base of rachis, slightly so distally, the blades asymmetrically oblong from obliquely truncate, postically acutangulate or incipiently auriculate base, a lidle incurved and at apex acutely triangular but not mucronate, the longer ones 7.5-10 x 2.4-3.5 mm, 2.6-3.1 times as long as wide; venation palmate and pinnate, delicately prominulous on both faces, the subcentric midrib incurved beyond middle, the inner posterior primary nerve produced wel] beyond midblade, the tertiary yenules few and sinuous.
Inflorescence not seen intact, and fls unknown, Pods pendulous, in profile broad-linear, nearly straight +17-19 x 1-14 cm, plumply biconvex, the thinly leathery valves densely brownish-pilosulous overall, weakly yenulose, the endocarp produced between seeds to form complete papery septa; dehiscence not seen; seeds vertically basipetal, plumply oblong-ellipsoid +18 x 11 x 4,5 mm, the papery, fragile, dull brown testa loosely investing the horny embryo, girdled by a fine prominulous nerve, brittle when dry; pleurogram 0; endosperm 0.
In riparian rain forest, known only from the Kaieteur Plateau in Guyana and from headwaers of Rio Caura in SW Bolfvar.
Venezuela. — Not mapped. — Fr. ripe in IIE-V. Although the flowers of Z potaroénsts are lacking, we have no doubt of its relationship to Z, claviflora and Z. palustris, of which it has the pallid olivaceous foliage, striate paleaceous stipules, and cauliflory; and we have no scruple in describing it as new, on account of the fully septate pod, a remarkable feature formerly unknown in the group.
In general aspect, Z potarvénsis appears nearest to Z. claviflora, which is remotely allopatric in southwestern Venezuela and northern Brazil and which differs substantially in leaf-formula (see diagnosis), in smaller leaflets, and in broader (though similarly pilosulous) pod.
From Z palustris, which Cowan and Soderstrom encountered on Kaieteur Plateau on the same day that they collected the type of Z. potaroénsis, it differs not only in leaf-formula and size of leaflets but also in the plumply biconvex, densely pubescent, not planocompressed and facially glabrous fruit.
We have contemplated the possibility that these two collections from Kaieteur represent lush flowering and modified fruiting specimens of one taxon, but the differences between them in foliage are altogether too great to support this view.
A taxon starts here.
4.
Zygia basijuga (Ducke) Bameby & Grimes, comb. nov. Pithecolobiun basijugum Ducke, Arch. Jard. Bot. Rio de Janeiro 122, 1930, — "[Brazil.
Amazonas:] .
.
. in silvis non inundatis prope Sao Paulo de Olivenga .
.
.
A. Ducke, 18-10-1927, Hferb.] Bfot.] Rlio de Janeiro] n.
20.174."
— Holotypus, RBI; isotypi, P!, U!, US 144/645!. — Macrosamanea basijuga (Ducke) Dugand, Mutisia 9: 6.
1952. — Marmaroxylon basijugum (Ducke) L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46: 551, 1991.
Pithecolobium basijugum sensu Ducke, 1949: 45.
Slender, multifoliolate, cauliflorous rrees m with smooth terete trunk to 1.5(—?) dm dbh, the young branchlets and all lf-axes pilosnlous with straight, erect or widely incurved-ascending, yellowish or sordid hairs to 0.2-0.5 mm, the lys bicolored, the thin-textured Ifts dull olivaceous above, paler beneath, the inflorescence composed of short efoliate pseudoracemes of few-fld capitula arising from knots on annotinous and older wood +1 m from the ground and upward.
Stipufes deltate-triangular, 0.5-1.3 x 0.3-0,75 mm, the blade thin-textured glabrescent, faintly 1-nerved or nerveless, tardily deciduous.
Lf formula lf-stks of larger lvs 6-15 cm, the petiole reduced to the pulvinus or almost so, the longer interpinnal segments 10-27 mm; a sessile, shallowly cupular thick-rimmed or almost plane buttonlike nectary 0,7-1,5 mm diam between the first pair of pinnae, samewhat smaller ones between 1-2 furthest pairs, and much smaller ones on pinna-rachises between the furthest 1-4 pairs of Ifts; the pinnae strongly decrescent proximally, the first pair very short and loosely amplexicaul, the rachis of further ones 5—9 cm, the longer interpinnal segments 3-7 mm; Ifts decrescent near each end of rachis, otherwise subequilong, ali subsessile against the rachis, the pulvinule obsolete or almost so, the blades narrowly oblong from obliquely tnincate base, shallowly sigmoidally arcuate, sharply auriculate postically, delcate-acuminulate at apex, the larger ones 11-17 x 3-5 mm, times as long as wide; venation slenderly palmate and pinnate, the midrib subcentric, the inner posterior primary nerve produced to or beyond midblade, the outer one very short, the secondary nerves from midrib faint, the tertiary venules immersed.
Primary axis of pseudoracemes 1.5-6.5 cm, 3-several-capitulate, the individual peduncles 2-9 mm, each subtended by a smal! deflexed bract charged ventrally with a buttonlike nectary about as wide, the capitula 4-10-fld, the receptacle 1-2 mm; bracts ovate mm, persistent; perianth (4-)5-merous, puberulent overall, the corolla greenish or ochroleucous, the filaments white; calyx campanulate, including the solid base 1-2 x 1.2-1.8 mm, the depressed-deltate teeth +0.1 mm; corolla slenderly tubular, moderately dilated at the limb, 9.5-14 mm, the often unequal ovate lobes 1.4-1.8 mm; androecium 46-60-merous, 23-30 mm, the stemonozone ],2—3.5 mm, the tube 1.2-1,9 mm; disc 0; ovary sessile, linear 2-2,8 mm, obliquely attenuate into the style, either glabrous or puberulent at anthesis, Pads 1-2 per capitulum, sessile or shortly attenuate at base into a pseudoslipe. in profile linear, nearly straight, 12-26 x 1.1-1.5 cm, planocompressed becoming low-convex over each seed, when well fertilized (10-)12-16-seeded, the firmly leathery castaneous glabrous valves framed by dilated puberulent, almost straight or shallowly undulate sutures, becoming coarsely venulose, the endocarp not septiferous between seeds, resinous in each seed-locule; dehiscence follicular, through the ventral suture, the valves narrowly gaping; seeds well spaced along the pod-cavity, basipetal on short funicle, compressedellipsoid, in broad view 11-12 x 6-7 mm, the papery, dull brown testa girdled with a prominulous nerve, medially fuscons, lacking pleurogram; endosperm 0, the testa closely investing but free from the embryo. [In rain forest, on sandy and sandy-clay soils, mostly below 200 m but at its W limit in Peru at +500 m, scattered along some upper tributaries of the Amazon River within 60°-78°W, 3°-9°S in depts.
Amazonas and Loreto, Peru, and state of Amazonas, Brazil. — Map 21. — Fl. VHI-XII. — Pashaco, sacha-bubinsana (Peru).
Ducke (1949, l.c.) distinguished this species from Z. claviflora principally by its white filaments, but the small, almost nerveless stipules, the deltately acuminulate leaflets, the extended axis of the pseudoracemes, and the broader pods (11-15, not +7.5 mm diam) are more substantial differences.
A taxon starts here.
5.
Zygia lathetica Barneby & Grimes, sp. noy.
Z. basijugam proxime affinem habitu, indumento, stipulis parvis enerviis, foliis pallide olivaceis et pseudoracemis caulifloris paucicapitulatis simulans, at corolla longiori 14-19 (nec 9.5-14) mm, androecii 64-100 (nec 46-40)-meri filamentis 36-40 (nec 23-30) mm Iongis liliacinis (nec albis), et praecipue legumine subdimidio latiori 20-23 (nec 11-15) mm lato macrosemio, seminibus +22 (nec 11-12) mm longis testa rugosa nitida (nec laevi) diversa. — ECUADOR, Napo: Parque Nacional Yasunf, Afiangu, 0°30'S, 76°25'W, 12.
VI1.82 (fl), 4 Luteyn (with Baisley, Clemants & Boeke) 8663. — Holotypus, NY; isotypi, AAU, QCA, QCNE. — Ihid., 21.
V1.1982 (fr), SEF 8822; paratypi, AAU, NY. — Etymology: Gr. fathetikos, easily overlooked.
Slender trees 6-15 m with trnk to +] dm dbh, closely resembling Z basijuga in habit, indumentum, smal! stipules, pallidly olivaceous foliage, and cauliflory, but differing in longer corolla, in longer and more numerous, pink-lilac (not white) filaments, and particularly in a broader pod and larger seeds, Stipufes appressed, triangular or lanceolate 0.7-2 x 0.5-1.7 mm, thin-textured, evenulose, tardily deciduous.
Lf formula v-viii/15-19; lf-stk of larger lvs 11-17 cm, the petiole reduced to the lf-pulvinus, the longer interpinnal segments +2—3 cm; nectary between the very short first pair of pinnae cupular thick-rimmed 1.2-1.8 mm diam, those at 1-3 further pairs and between few distal Ift-pairs progressively smaller; rachis of longer pinnae 7-12 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 5-8.5 mm; Ift-pulvinule almost 0, the blade sessile against rachis; lfts oblong or lance-oblong from obliquely truncate, postically auriculate base, deltately acute and mucronate at apex, falcately or shallowly sigmoidally incurved, the longer ones 15-26 x 5-8 mm, +3-3.3 times as long as wide; venation of Z. basijuga.
Primary axis of pseudoracemes +1.5-3.5 cm; peduncles 5-18 mm, each subtended by a bract charged with a small butcon-shaped nectary; capitula 5-9-fld, the receptacle 1-2 mm; calyx including solid base campanulate 2-2,3 x 1.2-1.8 mm, the teeth 0.1-0.25 mm, the tube puberulent, the im glabrescent; corolla reddish, tubular-funnelform 14-19 mm, moderately dilated at limb, puberulent overall, the often unequal lobes 1.5—3.2 mm; androecium 64—-100- merous, 36-40 mm, the filaments lilac (? yellowish), the stemonozone mm, the tube 16-20 mm, ovary sessile linear mm, at anthesis glabrous or microscopically papillate.
Pods pendulous, in profile broad-linear contracted basally into a short neck, nearly straight, 15-37.5 x 2-2,8 cm, compressed but biconvex, when well fertilized 12-16-seedied, the stiffly leathery, brown, coarsely venulose, glabrous valves framed by dilated, very shallowly undulate sutures, the endocarp narrowly thickened between seeds but not septiferous, the seed-locules resinous; dehiscence through the ventral suture, the valves finally explanate; seeds (few seen) obliquely basipetal, in broad view bluntly trapeziform +22 x 17 mm, compressed but plumply biconvex, the papery, dark brown, wrinkled but lustrous testa loosely investing the embryo, pleurogram 0; no endosperm.
In the understory of primary rain forest, on low hill country around the W edge of the Amazon basin, within 4°15'N—-1°S and 72°-77°W, in SE Colombia (Amazonas, Meta) and adj. Ecuador — Map 21. — Fl. V-VII, Zygia lathetica has been confused in herbaria with the related Z basijuga but is distinguished by larger flowers, more numerous and longer stamens, and especially by the massive pod and seeds (see couplet no. 4 in key to species of sect. Zygiopsts for measurements).
The form from the Araracuara in Colombia (J...
Torres 3145, 2 sheets, fruit and cauliflower on one sheet, leaves on another, NY) may merit some taxonomic status.
The leaves are indistinguishable from those on plants collected in Ecuador, but the pods differ.
The pods from Ecuador have leathery, glabrous, and internally resinous valves, whereas the pod from the Araracuara has woody densely brown-pilosulous valves that, at least when fully mature, are not internally resinous, As we have seen very few collections with fully ripe pods, as the leaves of all are nearly exact copies, and as the flowers from the population on the Araracuara are unknown, we defer any decision until more material comes to hand.
A taxon starts here.
6.
Zygia racemosa (Ducke) Barneby & Grimes, comb. nov, Pithecolobitwn racemosum Ducke, Arch, Jard. Bot, Rio de Janeiro 3: 272a, Corrigenda.
1922, a legitimate substitute for P racemiflorum Ducke, Arch. Jard. Bot. Rio de Janeiro 1: 14, pl. 4.
1915 (non PB racemiflorum Donnell Smith, 1913). — "[BRAZIL.
Pard:] .
.
. ad coloniam Santa Rosa prope viam ferream inter Belem et Braganga, 11-X- 1908 (H. A. M. P. 9.725); ad Obidos I[egit] A. Ducke, 10-IX-1910 (@.
11.031); ad flumen Jaramacari in vicinitate regionis Campos do Ariramba dictae legit] A. Ducke, 28-TX-1913 (n. — Lectotypus (Spichiger, Boissiera 43: 347, 1989): Ducke 14861, RB n.v.; isotypi, G n.v,, MG!; syntypi, MG (9725, P (9725)!, US 1044100 (9725)!. — Marmaroxylon racemosum Killip iz Record, Trop.
Woods 63: 3.
1940. — Abarema racemosa (Ducke) Kleinhoonte in Pulle, FA.
Suriname 2(2): 320.
1940.
Fig. 5.
Unarmed microphyllidious trees (6-)8-30 m with trunk 1-6 dm dbh and bark exfoliating in plates, the new branchlets, lf-axes, and whole cauliflorous inflorescence pilosulous (strigulose) or tomentulose with sordid or brown-gold, spreading or procumbently curved hairs to 0.1-0,35(-0.4) mm, the pallid epidermis of annotinons branches splitting vertically and exfoliating, the lvs bicolored, the firmly papery glabrous Ifts dark-olivaceous sublustrous above, paler beneath, the short dense, simpie or weakly branched pseudoracemes of small, fasciculate capitula arising from knotty brachyblasts on annotinous and older wood; branching monopodial, each branchlet of the year tipped by a loosely imbricate perule of cataphylloid stipules; axillary resting buds in many lf-axils similar to terminal perulate bud but smaller.
Stipules of expanding lvs slenderly lanceolate acute or lance-ovate obtuse: (2-)2.5-10(—-13) x 0.7-2.5 mm, the stiffly papery, glabrous or glabrate blade 3—7-nerved dorsally, early deciduous.
Lf-formula (iii-jiv—viii x 1912- 19(—23); lf-stks of larger Lvs (4-)5-14 cm, the ventrally flattened or shallowly sulcate peticle (including discolored obese but not wrinkled pulvinus) 3-24(—28) mm, at middle (0.8-)1-2.2 mm diam, the longer interpinnal segments 12-28(-30) mm; a (sub)sessile cupular, round or transversely elliptic, sometimes crumpled, thick-rimmed nectary 0.8-2.5 mm diam immediately below first pinna-pair and smaller ones at furthest or several further pairs, yet smaller ones, sometimes distinctly but shortly stipitate, between some distal pairs of Ifts; pinnae strongly decrescent proximally, less or not so distally, the rachis of penultimate pair 5-9.5(-11) cm, the longest interfoliolar segments (3-)3.5—7.5(-8) mm, all segments 3-sulcate ventrally at middle and pinched at insertion of lfts; lft-pulvinules 0.2-0,4 x 0.8-1.2 mm, the Ifts appearing sessile against pinna-tachis; Ifts opposite, decrescent proximally (the anterior one of proximal pair often lacking or reduced to a paraphyllidium), scarcely so distally, the blades narrowly oblong from obliquely truncate, angulately dilated or short-auriculate base, nearly always retuse and apiculate in the sinus, rarely broadobtuse and apiculate, those near mid-rachis (9-) 10-19(-20.5) x (3-)3.3-6.5(-7) mm, 2.5-3.7 times as long as wide; venation except for always finely prominulous, diagonal, gently sigmoid or almost straight midrib immersed or only faintly raised externally, palmate and then pinnate, the inner posterior nerve produced to anastomosis beyond midblade, the secondary nerves from anterior side of midrib 3-5, all faint, no tertiary venules externally visible.
Pseudoracemes either simple or proximally paniculately branched, the primary axis cm; peduncles per node, the longer ones (1.5-)3-11 mm, each fascicle subtended by a deltate deciduous bract 0.4-1 mm; capitula 12-25-fld, the axis 1-2(-2.5) mm; floral bracts ovate or spatulate 0.25-0.6 mm, persistent; fls sessile; perianth 5-merous, the fl-buds prior to anthesis pytiform, pinkish or greenish, grayor brownpuberulent overall; calyx campanulate or hemisphericat 0.7-1.1 x 0.7-0.9 mm, the depressed-deltate teeth 0.05-0.15 mm; corolla narrowly trumpet-shaped 3.2-4.3(-4.5) mm, described as pale brown, salmonpink, yellow, orange, or whitish (but brunnescent when dry), the erect ovate lobes 0.6—1.1 mm; androecium 18-22(-25)-merous, (9-)11-15.5 mm, when fresh ochroleucous, whitish, yellow-tipped, or orange, the tube (5.2-)6.5-9.5 mm, dilated distally, slightly thickened internally at base, the stemonozone +0.5 mm, disc 0; style linear, shortly exserted from androecium; ovary sessile, narrowly elliptic in profile 1.2-1.8 mm, smooth or micropapillate at anthesis, densely brownish-tomentulose after fertilization.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, sessile, in profile linear 4-7 x 0.7-1 cm, falcately recurved or nearly straight, compressed but plump (in cross-section grossly I-shaped), the woody sutures +2-3.5 mm wide, the stiffly coriaceous, internally resinous valves low-colliculate over seeds and depressed between them, mostly 8-12-seeded (but ovules sometimes to 24), the whole fruit densely bronze-brown-tomentulose overall with short crowded (but not "stellate') trichomes, the crumpled brown endocarp produced inward as complete or incomplete interseminal septa; dehiscence follicular, through the ventral suture, the valves widely gaping to expose the seeds; seed-funicle subfiliform; seeds (few seen) transverse or obliquely basipetal, in broad view 6-6.5 x 5 mm, the papery brown testa lacking pleurogram, loosely investing the plumply compressed, biconvex embryo.
In terra firme forest, commonly on clay substrates below 200 m, entering Amazonian caatinga on sandy soils, and ascending in the Guianas to upland forest at 450-600 m, frequent and widespread in the centr, and E Amazon basin, extending W up the Solimées into Loreto, Peru, and the Fum4 into Amazonas, Colombia, S into Rond6nia and Maranhio, Brazil, N into Venezuelan Guayana (Bolivar), S Guyana (upper Essequibo River), Surinam, and French Guiana. — Map 22. — Fl. (V-VID) VIIA. — Angelim pedra, angelim rajado, ingd-rana, urubuzeiro (Brazil); manalibaitt (Surinam); senkiehaedo, sineki-oudou (Surinam, French Guiana); bots serpent (French Guiana); pashaco, pashace cutanillo (Peru, where also applied to Abarema auriculata).
A taxon starts here.
7.
Zygia ocumarensis (Pittier) Barneby & Grimes, comb, nov, Klugiodendron ocumarense Pittier, Bol. Soc. Venez.
Ci. Nat. 4: 354, 1938, — "[VENEZUELA.) Aragua: Selvas inferiores del valle de Ocumare, Parque Nacional, 800 m.; flores Agosto 8, 1937, (Pittier 14099, tipo),' — Holotypus, VEN (2 sheets)!; isotypi, F 972944!, US 16927231. — Marmaroxylon ocumarense (Pittier) L, Rico, Kew Bull. 46: 518, 1991.
Macrophyllidious unarmed trees m, sometimes branched from near base, with pallid gray annotinous branchlets and glabrous, olivaceous subconcolorous foliage, the lf-axes when young either glabrous or minutely puberulent and the small axillary pseudoracemose flowering branchlets together with capitula of small greenish or whitish capitula silky-puberulent with yellowish or brownish hairs to 0.1-0.2 mm.
Stipules thick-textured deltate-triangular 1.3-3.5 mm, obscurely 3-5-nerved dorsally, persistent.
Lf-formula iif1, lf-stks subterete, the petiole including poorly differentiated pulvinus 2,5-7 cm, the petiole 6-24 mm, at middle 1.1-1.8 mm diam, the one interpinnal segment 2-5 cm; petiolar nectaries sessile, shallowly cupular thick-rimmed 1.2-2.5 mm diam between each pair of pinnae and slightly smaller, otherwise similar ones at tip of each pair of pinnae [2 basal nectaries described in protologue not seen in isotypes]; pinnae very unequal, the distal pair 1.52 times longer than the proximal, the rachis of distal pair (1.5-)2-4 cm; lft-pulvinules discolored, in dorsal view 2-3.5 x 0.6-1.6 mm; ovateor ellipticacuminate from narrowly cuneate more or less inequilateral base, the acumen triangular cm, the whole blade 10-19,5 x 3.7-9,5 cm, 2.1-3 times as long as wide; venation primarily pinnate, the straight centric midrib giving rise on each side to #7-10 major secondary nerves ascending and incurved to anastomosis shortly within the plane but sometimes subundulate margin and to many, more widely spreading minor ones, these all generating a reticulum of veinlets, the midrib and secondary veins pallid, scarcely raised above, sharply so beneath, the lesser veinlets only faintly prominulous.
Pseuderacemes of capitula solitary or paired in the axil of coeval lvs, the primary axis usually 5-30 mm, sometimes subobsolete and reduced to 1-2 peduncles; peduncles either solitary or geminate 8-38 mm, either naked or charged near middle (rarely near apex) with a small stipuliform bracteole; capitula hemispherical 17-30-fld, the fls sessile homomorphic, the receptacle 2-3.5 mm; bracts triangular incurved 0.7-0.9 mm, persistent; perianth 5- merous, silky-pilosulous overall; calyx submembranous campanulate 2.3-3 x 1.1-1.5 mm, the deltatetriangular teeth 0.3-0.7 mm; corolla cylindric 7-9 x 0.6-0,7 mm, weakly 5-nerved, the lobes (unequal) +0.4-1 mm, at apex hooded and dorsally gibbous, with incurved submembranous tip; androecium +40— 66-merous, 12-18 mm, the siender tube 8-]2 mm, exserted 1-2.5 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous, subsessile, surrounded at base by a shallowly lobed disc 0.40.6 x 0.4-0.5 mm, the glabrous style filiform, a little shorter than the longer filaments.
Pods solitary, subsessile, in profile undulately linear, falcately recurved through +'4—% circle, compressed but turgid, 8-10-seeded, the sutures 2.5-3 mm wide, flattened dorsally but forming a low frame around the stiffly leathery, obscurely venulose valves, these shallawly depressed between seeds, densely minutely sordidyellow-velutinous, the cavity not septate, the endocarp smooth, pale tan; dehiscence follicular, through the narrowly gaping seminiferous suture; seed-funicle linear compressed, twisted; seeds basipetal, attached just above base, plumply compressed-ellipsoid, in broad view +13-15 x 0.6-0.7 cm, 4-5 mm thick, either nearly approximate along the cavity or contiguous and then obliquely truncate by mutual pressure, the dry brittle-papery ochre-brown testa loosely investing the blackish embryo, girdled by a darker nerve, and at middle of each broad face very thin and subtranslucent; pleurogram 0; no endosperm.
In semi-moist evergreen or drier semideciduous forest, 75-800 m, apparently local in the coastal cordillera of N Venezuela, in Miranda, Aragua, and Distrito Federal, and represented by a variety or close ally in N Colombia (see note following). — Not mapped. — Fi.
JI-IV, VII, the full season not determined.
The foregoing description of Z ocumarensis was prepared from five collections originating in the coast range of Venezuela.
We have seen in addition two gatherings from the Magdalena valley in department of Santander, Colombia (0.
Haught 2097, A, F, K, US 1742363, and Haught 1695, US 1707503) which are certainly congeneric and probably conspecific, though differing in some small points.
Haught's plants have only flowers; each was annotated by Killip as an undescribed species of Kiugiodendron.
The foliage of 2097 is indistinguishable from that of Venezuelan Z ocwmarensis, but that of no. 1695, a mere scrap of a twig with one leaf and one depauperate inflorescence, differs in Jeaf-formula of if] (not iifl) and, as noted on the field label, "conspicuous purple stamens'; furthermore the perianth is nearly glabrous and strongly ribbed.
The twig itself is infested with the fungus Sclerographium aterrimum Berkeley (det.
C. Rogerson, NY), which could account for the anomalous features of the specimen, which we propose to leave aside as enigmatic.
The abundantly flowering Haught 2097, of which the collector left no note as to color of the filaments, differs from the Venezuelan type in these particulars: stipules deciduous, though only tardily; li-stks 9-10.5, the petiole 4.5-5.5 cm, the interpinnal segments 4-5 cm: Ift-pulvinules 9-10.5 mm; larger Ifts 13-18 x 6-7.5 cm, 2-2.8 times as long as wide; axis of pseudoracemes to 4.5 cm; peduncles 7-11 mm, some subtended by a midimentary if-stk with nectary; flowers very slightly heteromorphic, larger upward but without a modified terminal one; calyx 1.6-2.5 x 1-1.3 mm; corolla 4.8-6.5 mm; androecium 42-58-merous, 10-14 mm, the tube 6-8 mm; nectarial disc at base of ovary 0.5-0.8 mm tall.
It has been segregated as Marmaroxylon magdalenae Rico, but whether its characters are racially significant we cannot foresee until the fruit becomes known.
Search in the devastated forest of the Magdalena valley should be made for survivors,
A taxon starts here.
8.
Zygia ramiflora (Bentham) Barneby & Grimes, comb. nov. Pithecolobium ramiflorum Bentham, London J. Bot, 3: 215.
1844. — "Borba, in [Riedel, commun.] — Holotypus, K (hb. = NY Neg, 2029; isotypus, NY !. — Marmaroxylon ramiflorum (Bentham) L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46: 518.
1991.
Macrophyllidious unarmed trees, fertile at (3-) 4-10 m but potentially 30 m tall, with pallid annotinous branches, the leafand inflorescence-axes pilosulous with yellowish-brown hairs 0,15-0,4 mm, the leaves bicolored, the papery-membranous leaflets dark olivaceous, smooth and somewhat lustrous above, paler beneath, the short spikes of fragrant white fls mostly fasciculate directly on efoliate brachyblasts, or very shortly paniculate from knots on defoliate stems below the hornotinons foliage, or randomly axillary to a few older lvs.
Stipules ovate or lanceolate 1-3.5 mm, early dry deciduous, sometimes slenderly costate but not striately nerved externally.
Lf-formula of major lvs em, the true petiole often reduced to the stout pulvinus, at most 6(—13) mm long, the longer interpinnal segments +2-5 cm; a sessile, shallowly cupular thick-rimmed nectary 1.42.8 mm diam immediately below first pinna-pair, smaller ones often at insertion of some further pinna-pairs, and yet smaller ones on pinna-rachises between 2-3 further pairs of Ifts; pinnae strongly accrescent distally, the short first pair sometimes deciduous from small scars, the rachises of furthest pair (S-)7-13 (-15) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 8-25 (-33) mm; Ift-pulvinules obese, 0.5-1.4 x 0.7-1,4 mm; Ifts strongly accrescent upward from short first pair (these sometimes reduced to paraphyllidia), the blade of median and distal ones inequilaterally rhombic-elliptic or -oblong from proximally blunt-auriculate base, either shortly obtusely or attenuately acuminate and at very apex minutely apiculate, the penultimate pair 3.5- 9.5(-14) x om, 2.2-3.2(-4) times as long as wide, the furthest pair usually a little longer and less oblique; venation weakly palmate at very base and thence pinnate, the slender subcentric, distally incurved midrib sharply prominulous on both faces, giving rise on each side to 6-11(-12) weak, widely ascending (and indefinite fainter intercalary) secondary nerves brochidodrome shortly within the plane margin, an irregular reticulum of veinlets sometimes perceptible dorsally.
Spikes +15—40-fld, the axis including short or obsolescent peduncle 6-20 mm, bracts deltate acute 0.7—1.1 mm, persistent; fls sessile ascending; perianth 5-merous, the calyx brown-goidpubenilent beyond middle, sometimes overall, the corolla either puberulent overall or only the lobes minutely so; calyx deeply campanulate 2-3 x 6.9-1.6 mm, the depressed-deitate teeth 0.2-0.4 mm; corolla subcylindric mm, the erect, often unequal lobes 0.8-2 x 0.6-0.9 mm; androecium 20-42-merous, 14,5-18,5(-25) mm, the stemonazone 0.8 mm or less, the tube 7.5—9.5(-10.5) mm, exserted 1 mm or more; ovary sessile, narrowly ellipsoid, conic at apex, at anthesis glabrous but densely tomentellous following fertilization, surrounded at base by a shallowly lobed disc 0.35-0,7 mm tall.
Pods sessile, in profile linear, faleately or only slightly decurved, 8-11.5 x !-1.1 cm, 8-17-seeded, strongly compressed, the almost flat, stiffly leathery valves framed by dilated sutures 1.5—3 mm wide and constricted if at all only where ovules abort, the ripe valves obscurely colliculate over seeds, externally evenulose, densely brown-tomentelious overall, internal septa 0; dehiscence not surely known, apparently folliculate, the epicarp sometimes cracking transversely between seeds but firmly attached to sutures, the endocarp smooth, reddish brown and resinous within the seed cavities, brownish between them; seed-funicle compressed, sigmoid; seeds obliquely basipetal, compressed-ellipsoid +8 x 6 mm, the papery testa girdled by peripheral nerve, subdiaphanous at middle of each seed-face, loosely investing the green embryo; pleurogram 0.
In terra firme forest, Amazonian caatinga, and campirana, below 250 m, scattered through middle and upper Amazonia in Brazil (Amazonas, Acre, and adj. Peru (Loreto), and SW Venezuela (T. F, Amazonas), thence weakly N into the upper Orinoco basin (lower Rio Ventuari); perhaps (see discussion) also distantly disjunct in Pacific Colombia (Valle). — Map 23. — Fl. IX-XII, — ingaf (near Manaus).
Zygia ramifiora is related most closely to Z. collina and Z transamazonica.
It differs from Z. collina somewhat precariously in lower leaf-formula, but Z. fransamazonica seems more substantially distinct in glabrous foliage and lack of petiolar nectaries.
Full comparisons must be postponed, however, until the fruits of these two relatives are known.
We find Z. ramiflora inconveniently labile in number of pinnae per leaf, less so in size and number of leaflets, and moderately so in pubescence of the perianth; but we have failed to trace significant correlations either among these features or between them and dispersal.
The original 2 ramiffore, from the lower Madeira valley at Borba, unknown to Ducke (1949: 45), has leaf-formula ii-iii/7-8 and larger leaflets to +6-8 cm long; that of Pithecellobium umbrifiorum, from the SolimGes valley near 68°W, has leaf-formula ii-iv/7-9 and larger leaflets about 3.5 em long; while that of F dinizii, from the lower Trombetas basin at 54°W, has leaf-formula i-ii/7-8 and larger leaflets to 4 cm.
A few modem collections have, with 2 to 4 pairs of pinnae, either as few as 6 leaflet-pairs to 9-10 cm jong or as many as 10 paits to 3 cm long, but most fall somewhere between those extremes.
The type collection of Pithecellobtum dinizii, of which Ducke saw only one individual tree, is unique in this context because of predominantly geminate (but some bijugate) pinnae combined with pink flowers.
One other instance of geminate pinnae QL.
S. Coetho 31, from mun. Oriximind, Pard, NY) is known, but its flowers, like those of Z ramiflora elsewhere, are white, However, both pinkand whiteflowered forms are known in some other species of Zygia (e.g., Z inaequalis, Z. collina), and the leafformula, although marginal, is not discontinuously separate.
Pending discovery of the fruit, which could be surprising, it seems prudent to interpret Pithecellobium dinizit as a taxonomically insignificant variant of Zygia ramiflora.
A specimen (Cuarrecasas 16075, US) from the department of Valle in Pacific Colombia, unfortunately lacking fully expanded flowers, seems conspecific with Amazonian Z. ramiflora, but its identity requires confirmation from more mature material.
The record is omitted from our map (Map 23), This Colombian zygia is locally known as pinchindé de monte.
A taxon starts here.
9.
Zygia transamazonica Barneby & Grimes, sp. nov., adspectu toto necnon florum disco intrastamineo Z. ramifloram simulans, sed ab eo petiolo communi glaberrimo (nec sardide puberulo) nectariis carenti, petiolo vero evolute +2.5 (nec 0.6-1) cm usque longo, floribus capitulatis (nec spicatis), calyce glabro (nee puberulo), floribus roseis (nec albis), necnon androecio +2.6 (nec 1.5-1.75) cm longo abstans. — BRAZIL.
Amazonas, mun, de Novo Arjpuand: Rod. a 400 km de Humaitd, Projeto INCRA-Rfo Juma, vicinal Corujé a 30 km da Transamazénica, 7°15'S, 60°W, 3.
V.1985, C. A. Cid Ferreira 5997. — Holotypus, INPA n.v.; isotypus, NY. lf-formula but the lf-axes glabrous, the almost glabrous cauliflorons inflorescence composed of few-fld capitula, the [f-nectaries wanting, and the flowers pink, the rudimentary puberulence of inflorescenceaxis and bracts golden-brown.
Stipules not seen; no terminal resting bud.
Lf-formuia iii/6; lf-stks 7-8 cm, the petiole including pulvinus +2.5 cm, at middle +2 mm diam, the interpinnal segments 2.5-3 cm, the shallow ventral sulcus continuous between pinnapairs; pinnae distally accrescent, the rachises of furthest pair 8-9.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.5-2 cm, the ventral groove bridged at insertion of lits; Lft-pulvinules 0.7-0.9 x 0.9-1.2 mm, the blade sessile against rachis; Ifts decrescent proximally, thence subequilong, the blades elliptic-acuminate from postically blunt-auriculate, antically haifcuneate base, at very apex obtuse apiculate, those of further pairs x 1.6-2.3 cm, 2.6-3.7 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the subcentric, almost straight midrib sharply prominulous on both faces, the +10-14 major and random intercalary secondary nerves widely ascending to anastomosis well within the plane margin and finely prominulous on both faces, a tertiary reticulum of veinlets well defined only dorsally.
Pseudoracemes of capitula clustered on brachyblasts along annotinous and older branches, the primary axis <1 cm, the peduncles solitary, subtended by a deltate bract <1 mm, the longer peduncies 3-5 mm; capitula 7-11-fld, the subglobose receptacle J-1.5 mm; floral bracts 0.7-0.9 mm, persistent; fls homomorphic, sessile, glabrous; calyx ovoid-campanulate 1.4-2 x 1-1.3 mm. the deltate teeth 0.3 mm; corolla narrowly trumpet-shaped +6.5 mm, the erect ovate lobes +1 mm, the tube only faintly veined; androecium 30-merous, 26 mm, the slenderly cylindric tube 7 mm, the stemonozone +0.4 mm; a shallowly lobed disc 0.3-G.45 mm tail surrounding the sessile ovary, this slenderly ellipsoid, at anthesis glabrous; style filiform, not dilated at apex.
Pods unknown.
In terra firme forest on clay substratc, known only from the type-locality at 7°15'S, 60°W, on middle Rio Aripuana in SE state of Amazonas, Brazil. — Not mapped. — FL — "Madeira dura, castanha, com cerne alburno indistinto; flores vistosas de cor Zygia transamazonica closcly resembles Z. ramiflora in aspect and in number and form of leaflets but differs significantly in the well developed petiales, glabrous leaf-axes devoid of nectary, and capitulate rather than spicate units of inflorescence.
The quite glabrous calyx and relatively long androecium that are mentioned in the Latin diagnosis are probably less reliable, perhaps only individual, differences.
A pink perianth distinguishes the typus of Z. transamazonica from all of Z. ramiflora except the somewhat ambiguous element described as Pithecellobium dinizii, in which the pinnae are only 1 or 2 pairs per leaf.
A taxon starts here.
10.
Zygia steyermarkii (Schery) Barneby & Grimes, comb. nov. Pithecolobium steyermarkti Schery, Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard, 37: 398 + fig. 1950. — "ECUADOR: Proy.
Santiago-Zamora, along Quebrada Honda, vicinity of Rancho Achupallas, alt. 2500-2700 m., J. A. — Holotypus, Steyermark 54576, collected 10 Oct 1943, MO 1603859) = NY Neg. 12887.
Macrophyllidious cauliflorous irees of unrecorded stature, the young branchlets, lf-axes, and inflorescence densely brown-pilosulous-tomentulose, the bicolored Ifts when dry tustrous dark brown above, beneath light brown and (especially along principal nerves) pilosulous, the short-oblong capitula of grant white fls relatively long-pedunculate from a very short common axis.
Stiputes linear-lanceolate, those subtending a If 3.5-5 mm, those tufted at the (sub)terminal axils forming a loose tuft and somewhat longer, the blades submembranous.
Lf-formuta the Ifts +32 per If; lf-stks stout 7-9.5 cm, the petiole and 1 interpinnal segment of subequal length; a sessile, shallow-cupular nectary +1.8 mm diam at insertion of lower pinna-pair, none elsewhere; rachis of further, slightly longer pinnae to 13.5 cm, its longer interfoliolar segments +2.5—3 cm: Ift-pulvinules obese, in dorsal view 2-2.5 mm; Ifts a little accrescent upward, in outline ovate-elliptic from inequiiaterally cuneate base, acutely short-acuminate, the furthest pair +6.5— 8 x 2.4-3 cm, 2,3-2.7 times as long as wide, the lowest (odd) Ift about half as long; venation pinnate, the nearly centric, scarcely incurved midrib giving rise on each side to 5-6 strong (and few weaker intercalary) secondary veins incurved-ascending to shortly within the plane margin, and these to random tertiary and fine reticular venules, the whole venation sharply prominulous on dorsal face, finely so above.
Primary axis of inflorescence scarcely 1 cm, the solitary peduncles crowded together, 5-8.5 cm, capitula +25—30-fld, the floral receptacle cbovoid-claviform 3-7 mm, the calyces at anthesis contiguous; bracts narrowly lanceolate +1 mm, puberulent, persistent; fls sessile, the perianth densely brown-silky-strigulose overall; calyx campanulate +2.5-2.8 mm, the narrowly triangular teeth unequal, mm; corolla nearly tubular 9.5-10 mm, the lance-triangular recurving lobes +1.6 mm; androecium (2 seen) 54-merous, 19 mm, the tube nearly as long as corolla, the intrastaminal disc +0.4 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous, tapering into the style, this a little longer than longest stamens, the orifice scarcely dilated, poriform.
Pods unknown, In unrecorded habitat, to be expected in moist Andean forest remnants, near 2600 m, known only from the type locality, this said to be in prov, SantiagoZamora, but perhaps the well-known town of Achupallas W of the Andean crest in S prov. Chimborazo, Ecuador (near 2°15'S, 78°45°W). — Not mapped. — Fl. X. In vegetative and floral characters the notably distinct even though incompletely known 2 steyermarkii is fully compatibte with our sect. Parazygia, in which it is remarkable for its montane habitat, lack of leaf-nectaries beyond that at the first pinna-pair of each leaf, suppression of the anterior leaflet of the proximal pair in each pinna, dorsally pilosulous leaflets, and relatively long peduncles.
A kinship, suggested by Schery, with the Hylaean Z. ramiflora is plausible, but a secure place within the genus depends, nevertheless, on discovery of the fruit.
A taxon starts here.
11.
Zygia collina (Sandwith) Barneby & Grimes, comb, nov., Pithecellobiiun collinum Sandwith, Kew Bull. 1948: 315, 1948.—"BRITISH GUIANA.
Groete Creek, Lower Essequibo River, April 16th, 1943, D. B. Fanshawe in Forest Dept. no. 3976."
— Holotypus, K (2 sheets)! = NY Negs.
2034, 2035; isotypi, NY (2 sheets)!, U!, US! — Marmaroxylon collinum (Sandwith) L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46: 516.
1991.
Amply multifoliolate trees 6-35 m with often crooked, when old narrowly buttressed trunk attaining 3 dm dbh, the new branchlets and all lf-axes puberulent with erect or forwardly incurved, yellowish hairs to G.1-0.35 mm, the lfts glabrous, lustrous dark green (when dry brown) above, paler beneath, the inflorescence of short simple spikes of fragrant fls arising from knots on annotinous and older wood at points 2 m upward from the ground; axillary perules ovoid +2 mm, puberuient.
Stipudes caducous (few seen), triangular or lanceolate 1.5-3 x 1-1.5 mm, externally nerveless, Lf-formula v—viitl2-18, lf-stks of longer lys 7-13 cm, the petiole G, the short deflexed amplexicaul first pair of pinnae inserted next to lf-pulvinus, the longer interpinnal segments 15-26 mm; petiolar nectary between first pair of pinnae sessile, shallowly cupular thick-rimmed or almost plane, 1.6-2 mm diam, similar but smaller and more deeply cupular ones between furthest 2-3 pairs of pinnae and yet smaller ones on pinna-rachis between 2-3 furthest pairs of Ifts; pinnae distally accrescent, the penultimate pair often longest, the rachises of these 6-14.5 cm, the Jonger interfoliolar segments 5-10 mm; Iftpulvinules 0.2-0.3 x 0.5-0.9 mm, the blade sessile against rachis; lfts abruptly decrescent at base of rachis, thence subequilong or somewhat decrescent distally, the plane blades oblong or lance-cblong from obliquely truncate, obtusangulate base, gently incurved into a deltate, sharply mucronate tip, the longer ones (18-)20-27(-30) x 5S-8(-11.5) mm, (2.6-)3-4.5 times as long as wide; venation palmate and pinnate, the slender subcentric midrib distally incurved, finely prominulous on both faces, the inner posterior primary nerve produced nearly to midblade, the outer 2-3 very short, the slender secondary nerves from midrib and open reticulum more sharply defined dorsally.
Spikes subsessile, not subtended by a rudimenlary If, 7-15-fld, the rachis 6-10 mm; bracts broadly ovate +1 mm, persistent; fls sessile, the perianth minutely strigulose overall or glabrous except for lobes of calyx and corolla, the (4-)5-merous calyx deeply campanulate 1.7-3 x mm, the depresseddeltate teeth 0.15-0.3 mm; corolla whitish subtubular, yery slightly ampliate at the limb, 7-10 mm, the unequal ovate lobes +1-1.2 mm, androecium 26-30- merous, 17-19 mm, the stemonozone +1 mm, the tube 10 mm, the free filaments ochroleucous or (Fanshawe 1254) "pale ovary in profile linear-elliptic 1.8-2 mm, contracted at base into a stipe 0.3 mm or less, conical at apex, at anthesis smooth glabrous; disc to 0.2 mm tall, sometimes obscure.
Pods sinuously linear 7-10 cm, at each seed 8-10 mm wide, gently recurved or, after dehiscence, more or less contorted, the leathery valves framed by sutures 2-2.5 mm wide in dorsal view, densely brown-tomentellous overail, the cavity continuous, the endocarp smooth brown, erratically resin-speckled; dehiscence follicular, through the ventral suture, the valves explanate in age; seeds unknown.
In upland rain forest, 40-250 m, best known from NE Venezuelan Guayana (state of Bolivar and adj. T. Delta-Amacuro) and centr. Guyana (lower Essequibo valley), apparently disjunct on the headwaters of Rfo Orinoco near 63°46'W in state of Amazonas, and (sterile, needing confirmation) on Rfo Sipapo (Cerra Tigrito, t67°W). — Map.
24. — FI.
II-V, VIL. — Curarina;, hueso ot espina de pescado (Venezuela); uriridan (Arawak).
Sandwith compared Z collina with Pithecellobium umbriflorum, which is treated here as synonymous with Zygia ramiflora; except for leaf-formula the resemblance is close and almost certainly denotes a real relationship.
So far as is known today, Z. collina is nearly uniform in leaf-architecture and inflorescence.
The sympatric species of sect. Zygiopsis that resemble Z colfina in leaf-formula lack a nectarial disc in the flowers and are recognizable by the pale green coloring and sharply auriculate base of the leaflets.
A taxon starts here.
12.
Zygia tetragona Bameby & Grimes, sp. nov., sect. Parazygiae juxta Z. collinum quocum foliorum facie, nisi foliolis acuminulatis, congrua, sed ab hac foliolis minoribus (7-12 x 2.5, nec 18-30 x 5-1] mm usque), magis confertis, facie superiori convexis, debiliter 1-2-neryiis (nec palmato-pinnati-nerviis), perianthio densissime sericeo-pilosulo (nec sparse minutim striguloso vel glabrescenti), calyce subhemisphaerico profunde campanulato), necnon tubo staminali abbreviato incluso (+3-—5, nec 10 mm. longo) diversa, — FRENCH GUIANA.
Bassin de Station des Nouragues, 4°3'N, 52°42'W, 23 Jul 1989 D. Sabatier & M. F Prévost — Holotypus, CAY!; isotypi, NY!, and (s.v.) B, K, MO, P, U. — Montagnes des Nouragues, Feb, 1990 (f.), D. Larpin 867. — Paratypus fruct, NY. — Etymology: Gr. tetragonos, = 4-angled (of the pod).
Fig. 6 Broad-crowned microphyllidious cauliflorous trees 6-35 m with blackish or light brown trunk potentially 6 dm dbh, sometimes branched from base upward, the young stems and all axes of lvs and inflorescence densely finely pilosulous with spreading, + sinous, brown hairs to 0.3-0.5 mm, the bicolored Ifts either glabrous overall or thinly ciliolate along midrib dorsally, above glossy dark green and convex, paler dull beneath, the inflorescence composed of short sessite spikes fasciculate on knots along the trunk and on annotinous and older branches well below coeval foliage.
Stipules firm, lanceolate 2-4 x mm, brown-silky dorsally, glabrous within, not visibly venolose, deciduous, the terminal restingbuds of similar, loosely imbricate scales.
Lf-formula vi-x (xi)(16-)18-27; lvs sessile, the lf-stk including pulvinus 7-12 cm, the very short first pinna-pair inserted close to lf-pulvinus and deflexed amplexicaulous, the tonger distal interpinnal segments 1-18 cm: between first pinna-pair a sessile, shallow-cupular thick-rimmed, dark reddish brown nectary 0.8-1.4 mm diam, similar but smaller ones between 1-3 furthest pinna-pairs and often a minute one at tip of some pimna-rachises; pinnae strongly decrescent downward from below mid-If, thence subequilong, the rachis of longer ones 4.5-8 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2-4.5 mm; Ifts abruptly decrescent near base of pinna-rachis (the anterior of the first pair often reduced to a paraphyllidium), slightly or scarcely decrescent distally, all sessile against rachis, the pulvinule 0,2-0,4 mm in dorsal view, wider than long, the Ift-blades narrowly rhombic-oblong from obliquely truncate, postically blunt-auriculate base, triangular and sharply apiculate at the more or less porrect apex, the longer ones 7-12 x 2-5 mm, (2,4-) 2.6-3.5 times as long as wide; venation of mature lfts mostly reduced to the simple midrib, this only slightly forwardly displaced beyond midblade, but i weak primary nerve sometimes produced, on posterior side of midrib, well beyond midblade but not brochidodrome, tertiary venules not externally evident.
Fl-spikes sessile, the axis 8-13 mm; bracts de)- tate 1,2-1,5 mm, like the whole perianth densely pilosulous externally overall; calyx campanulate 1.9— 2 mm, nearly as wide, the depressed-deltate teeth 0.35-0.5 mm; corolla subcylindric 5-7 mm, the ascending lanceolate teeth 1,3-1.8 mm; androecium 34-42-merous, 15.5-18 mm, the sternonozone 0.6 mm, the included tube 3.5-5 mm, the tassel reddish distally; nectarial disc +0.3 mm tall, twice as wide; ovary at anthesis glabrous, narrowly ellipsoid tapering into the style; stigma minute poriform.
Pods (Larpin 867 + photos; de Granville 5872, NY) pendulous, sessile, in profile falcately linear 8.5-11 x 0.6 cm, 8-9-seeded, bluntly tetragonal (not laterally compressed), the thick, rigidly ligneous, transversely dilate, longitudinally shallow-sulcate sutures as wide as the pod itself, in section +! mm thick, the valves as thick but only half as wide, scarcely elevated over seeds, the whole fruit densely minutely brownishpilosulons overall; dehiscence follicular, through the seminiferous (convexly arcuate) sumre, the valves gaping widely; seeds basipetal, discretely uniseriate, narrowly ellipsoid x 3(-"6") mm, the testa when dry papery castaneous exareolate, described as "greenish white, peripherally when fresh.
Tn Jowland primary forest, at least sometimes cn stream banks, and ascending on Montagnes de Ja Trinité to scrub-forest on granite at 470 m, locally plentiful but known only from the basins of the Sinnamary and ApprovaguelArataye rivers in N and N-centr. French Guiana (+3°L0°N, — Map 24. — FI.
VII(-2).
A taxon starts here.
13, Zygia eperuetorum (Sandwith) Bameby & Grimes, comb. nov. Pithecellobium eperuetorum Sandwith, Kew Bull. 1948; 316.
1948. —"BRITISH GUIANA.
Bartica—Potaro road.
.
. fl, Nov. 10th, 1943, D. B. Fanshawe [1434] in Forest Dept. no. 4170" — Holotypus, K!; isotypus, NY!. — Paracypus, Fanshawe in F D. 3563, K = NY Neg 2036. —— Marmaroxylon eperuetorwn (Sandwith) L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46: 516.
1991.
Slender macrophyllidious cauliflorous trees 3-12 m with trunk 3-8 cm dbh, appearing glabrous but the lfstks minutely puberulent, the ample, stiffly papery Ifts bicolored, when dry olivaceous above, pale brown beneath, the condensed panicle of racemes densely graypubenilent overall.
Stipules unknown.
Lf-formula ii/3- 5; lf-stks 5-8.5 cm, the petiole reduced to the pulvinus, the 1 interpinnal segment 5-8 cm; nectary between each pair of pinnae sessile, plane, +1.5-2 mm diam, none seen on pinna-tachises; rachises of further pinna-pair 20-27 cm, the longer interpinnal segments 24-7 cm; Ift-pulvinules 3.5—-5 mm, livid and wrinkled; Ifts little graduated, the blades elliptic-acuminate from inequilaterally cuneate base, subfaleately incurved, the longer ones +10-14 x 3-5.5 cm; venation palmate and then pinnate, the subcentric, gently incurved midrib slenderly prominulous on each face, the postetior primary nerve ascending to or beyond midblade, the anterior one weaker or obsolete, the first pair of secondary nerves narrowly ascending, the further 5-8 pairs widely incurved-ascending, a weak tertiary venulation raised on both faces. inflorescence a condensed panicle, the primary axis +3-8 mm, the axis of the subsessile +6-20-fld racemes 28-16 mm, some or all racemes subtended by a rudimentary lf-stk with nectary; floral bracts deltate +0.6 mm, persistent; pedicels 1.5-1.8 x 0.35-0.4 mm; perianth 5-merous; calyx deeply campanulate 2-2.7 x 11.4 mm, the depressed-deltate teeth 0.2-0.3 mm: corolla cylindric, moderately ampliate at the limb, 9.5-10 mm, glaucous-green when fresh, the lobes +1.5 mm; androecium +21 mm, the tube +12-13 mm; no nectarial disc; ovary sessile, at anthesis glabrous; fruit unknown.
Locally common in wallaba (Eperua) forest on white sand, below 200 m, known only from the lower Essequibo valley in Guyana. — Not mapped. — Fl. XEXII.
A taxon starts here.
14.
Zygia sabatieri Bameby & Grimes, sp. nov., notulis supra sub sectione Pseudocojoba enumeratis distinctissima. — FRENCH GUIANA.
Piste de Saint-Elie, 53°W, 5°20/N, 4.
X,1988 (fl.) D. Sabatier & M. F. Prévost 3896. — Holotypus, CAY!; isotypi, Slender macrophyllidious cauliflorous trees of forest understory, attaining 12 m with trunk 1! cm dbh, the annotinous and older branchlets pallid gray or cream-color, the young ones and all axes of lvs and inflorescence minutely grayish-puberulent, the ample papery bicolored lfts glabrous, when dry dull brownolivaceous above, paler olivaceous beneath, the slenderly pedunculate, umbelliform capitula of pale green, pink-stamened, sweetly fragrant fls arising from extremely short efoliate brachyblasts axillary to fallen lys on annotinous and older branches.
Stipules erect appressed, of firm texture, ovate-triangular or lanceolate x 1.2-4 mm, dorsally convex, externally nerveless or nearly so, persistent.
Lf-formula the lfts 20-40 per If; lf-stks 5-8 cm, the petiole 1.5-3.5 cm, at middle 1.3-1.9 mm diam, the 1 interpinnal segment somewhat longer; nectary between each pinna-pair sessile, shallow-cupular thickimmed, 1.5-2.5 mm diam; distal pinnae longer than first pair, their rachis 7-11.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2-4 cm; Ifts opposite, the pulvinules in dorsal view +1].5-2.5 mm, much shorter in ventral view, weakly wrinkled; Ifts accrescent distally, inequilaterally clliptic or subrhambic-elliptic from cuneate base, contracted at apex into a lanceolate, at very lip obmse apiculate acumen +1 cm, the longer, furthest and penultimate blades 8-12.5 x 3-4.8 cm, 2.3-2.7 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, except for midrib ventrally immersed, bluntly prominulous dorsally, the straight or almost straight, subcentic midrib giving rise on each side to +7-9 major (and random intercalary) but slender, widely ascending secondary nerves weakly brochidodrome well within the plane margin, the tertiary venulation faint, sinuous.
Peduncles 1-2 per brachyblast, each arising singly from the axil of a rusty-strigulose bract, subcompressed, (1.5-)2.5-4 cm x 0.4-0.6 mm diam, capitula 30-48-fld, the homomorphic fls radiating from subglobose alveolate receptacle +1.5 mm diam, finely hispidulous overall; bracts submembranous, early dry deciduous, spatulate +0,5-).7 mm, the blade hispidulous; pedicel 0.8-1.5 x 0.2-0.25 mm; calyx campanulate +] x 0.7-0.8 mm, the unequal teeth 40.2 mm; corolla slenderly cylindric, a trifle diiated distally, +6.5—7 mm and 1 mm diam, the triangular-ovate, often unequal teeth to 0.5 mm; androecium 25-28-merous 11-12 mm, the tube 6-6.5 mm, nearly as long as corolla tube, the stemonozone +0.6 mm, the anthers 0.25-0.3 mm diam, disc 0, but the receptacle surrounding the base of the ovary tumid and slightly discolored, ovary glabrous, narrowly ellipsoid, tapering at apex, 9-12-ovulate; style 2-3 mm longer than longer stamens, the stigma poriform 0.1 mm diam. Pods subsessile, sinuously linearmoniliform and after dehiscence randomly twisted, when well] fertilized 14-20 cm, at each seed 6-7 mm and at each interseminal isthmus 2.5-3 mm wide, bluntly carinate by sutures +0.8 mm wide but biconvex over seeds, the individual seedsegments +16-20 mm long, the stiffly leathery, when ripe dark brown evenulose valves densely minutely puberulent overall, the endocarp smooth brown, the cavity continous; funicle and seed unknown, the seed described (Sabatier 2092) as green; one seedling (Sabatier 3050, ex parte, NY) has 6, simply paripinnate, 6-8 foliolate eophylls.
In lowland virgin forest, known with certainty (see discussion) only from the Sinnamary—Counamama divide at 5°20°N, 53°W in French Guiana. — Not mapped. — Fl. IX-X; fr.
III-IV. For commentary on this strongly characterized species, see description of sect. Pseudocojoba.
In addition te the specimens cited, we have seen one from the upper Oyapock River (Camp Poivre, 19.11.1976, with very young fruit detached from the trunk, C. Sastre 441, NY), which is almost certainly conspecific.
The species is consequently to be expected in Amapé, Brazil.
A taxon starts here.
15.
Zygia coccinea (G. Don) L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46; 496.
1991. — Typus infra sub var. coccinea indicatur.
Amply macrophyllidious, cauliflorous trees 5-11] (-?) m with usually single gray trunk 6-15(-30) cm dbh, glabrous except for some Ift-pulvinules and for minutely puberulent inflorescence, the lvs more or less discolorous when dry, commonly brownish green above and paler olivaceous beneath, dull on both faces, the lax or relatively dense spikes of white, ochroleucous, pink or crimson fls arising from knots on the trunk well below current foliage or randomly from nodes of annotinous branchlets, but not axillary to coeval Lys, Stipules seen on juvenile branchlets but absent from most mature specimens, ovate or lanceolate (1-)2-5 mm, often striately several-nerved.
Lf formula the Ifts (6-)10-14(-18) per If; petiole including livid pulvinus 4-27 x 1.4-4.5 mm; a sessile shallow-cupular nectary at apex of petiole +0.8-2.5 mm diam, similar but smaller ones between most further pairs; pinna-rachises (4.5-)8-22 cm, the longer (furthest) interfoliolar segment em; Ift-pulvinules livid 2.5-5(-6) mm; Ifts distally accrescent, the blades inequilaterally elliptic or oblance-elliptic from cuneate or cuneately attenuate base, shortly acuminate, the furthest pair 11-27 x (3-)+-11 cm, 2.3-3.3(-3.6) times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the centric or slightly displaced, straight or almost straight midrib and 4-7 pairs of major incurved-ascending secondary nerves prominulous on both faces but more so beneath, the first 1-2 secondary nerves on posterior side of midrib produced beyond midblade, the tertiary and reticular venules prominulous only dorsally.
Flower-spikes either solitary or fasciculate, the axis including peduncle (7-)9-40 cm; bracts triangularor lanceacuminate 0.3-0.9 mm, deciduous; fls sessile but the calyx abruptly contracted into a solid, dark-colored obconic or drum-shaped pedicel +0.15—0,4 mm: perianth either glabrous or thinly puberulent, the corolla tube striate, often emphatically so; calyx campanulate or crateriform, weakly 5-nerved or almost nerveless, at full anthesis often ruptured by the corolla, 0.6-2.6 x 1,2-1.6 mm, the teeth not more than 0.2 mm; corolla subtubular, scarcely dilated at the limb, 5-15 mm, the erect, often unequal lobes +0.75-1.3 mm; androecium 30-60(-80)-merous, 13-40 mm, the tube (5-)5.5-19.5 mm, the tassel white, ochroleucous, pink or crimson; intrastaminal disc 0.3-0.7 mm; ovary sessile, glabrous; style in most fils about as long as androecium, but in some (probably functionally staminate) fls less than half as long; stigma minute.
Pods pendulous, sessile, in profile broad-linear, straight, 15-24 x (2.1-)2.7-4 cm, at first strongly compressed but becoming biconvex and elliptic in crass section or subterete and nearly round in cross section, the sutures then immersed or almost so, the pithy-ligneous valves dull brown, glabrous unless microscopically puberulent along the sutures, in section +1.6-2.3 mm thick, the exocarp becoming lowtumulose and scurfy in age; dehiscence not seen; seeds (little known), apparently plumply disoid and uniseriate, broadside up, subcontiguous but not mutually distorted, perhaps sometimes more obese and crowded, as broad as the pod-cavity, the exotesta Papery, dark brown, pleurogram 0.
As described above, Z coccinea is a pluriracial species that varies in number and size of leaflets and in both absolute and relative lengths of the perianth parts and the androecium, which is itself independently variable in number of stamens, length of the tube, and color of the tassel.
Six taxa in this assemblage, all previously described, were maintained by Rico (1991) as valid species, but since no discriminatory characters were given, no specimens other than the types were mentioned, and no indication of dispersal was provided, we cannot evaluate her taxonomy or compare it with the more conservative classification here proposed.
Due to the scarceness of ripe fruits in herbaria and the difficulty of correlating fruit with flower, we have not been influenced by carpological features, which might possibly in future times furnish valuable diagnostic characters.
A taxon starts here.
15a.
Zygia coccinea var. oriunda (Macbride) Barneby & Grimes, comb. et stat. nov, Pithecellobiwn oriundum Macbride, Field Mus. Nat. Hist., Bot. Ser. 13 (Fi.
Peru), 3(1): 61, 1943, — "[Peru.] Loreto: to Balsapuerto, Killip & Smith 28273."
— Holotypus, F (not available for confirmation in 1989-1992); isotypus, NY!. — Zygia oriunda (Macbride) L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46: 504.
199).
Pithecellobium schultzeanum Harms, Notizbl.
Bot. Gart Berlin-Dahlem 333.
1939. — "Ost-Ecuador: Oriente, Pacayacu [= Pucayacu] ...
24 Marz 1937 (Hertha Schultze-Rhonhof n.
2270.
.
Holotypus, 'B; no iso- — typus found, but the detailed description and locality fully compatible with var. oriunda. — Zygia schultzeana (Harms) L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46; 505 (from 199], Corolla 5-8 mm, whitish; androecium (40—-76- merous) 13-22 mm, the tassel white or ochroleucous.
In primary forest, 260-1600 m, local on and near the E foothills of the Andes, 240-1200 m, from the Putumayo in Colombia S through Ecuador to +10°S in Peru, — Map 25. — Fl. IX, XTHIL, the full season not reliably reported. —- Rayo caspi (rayu cachi), the ped said to be edible, the plant used in medicine as antifungal; arbol de truno (Ecuador),
A taxon starts here.
15b.
Zygia coccinea var. coccinea. inga coccinea G. Don, Gen. Hist. 2: 390.
1832. — "Native of Peru.
Mimosa coccinea, Ruiz, et Pay[6n] in herb, lamb[ert.)."
— Holotypus, labeled "Mimosa coccinea, potius punicea, sp. nova del Pert, Ruiz & Pavon,' OXF (2 sheets, fl. + 1 sheet, fr. immat.)!; isotypi, G! and presumably MA; Rico's lectotypification by a duplicate at MA is rejected, for George Don must have based the description of Inga coccinea on a plant sent by Pavén to Lambert; the isotype at F, cited by Rico, is not currently (1992) confirmable. — Pithecolobium coccineum (G. Don) Bentham, Trans.
Linn. Soc. London 30: 594, 1875. — Feutlieea coccinea (G. Don) O. Kuntze, Revis.
Gen. PL 1: 187.
1891.
Resembling var. oriunda in size, but var. macrophylla in color, of the fls; corolla 7.5-9 mm, pink; androecium (34-80-merous) 19-25 mm, the tube (58-14 mm, usually well exserted, the tassel pink or crimson.
In upland forest, 200-1600 m, best known from foothills and intermontane valleys of the central Pecuvian Andes and immediately adj. Acre, Brazil, in lat. +9°-10°S, and seemingly disjunct in the Yungas of La Paz, Bolivia, in lat. 6°-7°S. — Map.
25. — Fl. —- Shimbiito (Peru).
A taxon starts here.
15c. Zygia coccinea var. macrophylla (Bentham) Bameby & Grimes, comb. et stat. nov, Pithecolobiten macrophyliwn Spruce ex Bentham, Trans.
Linn. Soc. London 30; 593.
1875. — ''Tarapoto in Eastern Peru, — Holotypus, Spruce 4142, K! = NY Neg. 2004. — Feuilleea tarapoto O. Kuntze, Revis.
Gen, PL. 1: 186.
1891: non FE macrophylia (Humbokit & Bonpiand) O. Kuntze, 1891.
Corolla 9.8-15 mm; androecium (30-60-merous) 30-40 mm, the tube 12-19.5 mm, always longexserted, the tassel bright pink or crimson, In forest or forest remnants, 260-856 m, local in the Huallaga and Ucayali valleys in N-centr. Peru, in Jat.
6°-10°S, and disjunct, like var. coccinea, in the Bolivian Yungas near 16°30'S. — Map 25. — Fi.
V-VIL The dispersal of var. macrophylla (Map 25) suggests that it may be no more than a random selection of relatively long-flowered specimens of var. coccinea.
A taxon starts here.
16.
Zygia heteroneura Barneby & Grimes, sp. nov., Z coccineae et praecipuc ejus var. oriundae affinis, sed ab hac foliolorum pulvinulis elongatis (6.5-11, nec 2.5-6 mm longis), foliolis maximis (2.5-3 dm et ultra aftingentibus), foliolonim venatione subsymmetrica (quasi 5-plinervia), androecioque +130 (nec 30-60)-mero diversa; a Z. megistocarpa pinnarum tachi elongate 16-26 (nec 7-17) cm longo, foliolorum venatione, inflorescenctiae axi brevicri +12 (nec 30 usque) mm longo, et calyce vix 1 (nec 2) mm tongo abstat, — ECUADOR.
Pastaza: Rfo Curaray, alrededores de Laguna Garzayacu, 1°29S, 20-26 Aug 1985 (f1.), Walter Palacios (with D. Neiti) 662, — Holotypus, NY.
Slender macrophyllous cauliflorous srees 6-7 m, glabrous except for sordid-puberulent, spicate inflotescence, the lvs subsessile, the extremely ample, stiffly chartaceous Ifts dull brownish-olivaceous when dry, a little paler beneath.
Stiputes and resting-buds not seen.
Lfformula i/2\4, the lfts 10 per If; petiole reduced to a stout wrinkled fuscous pulvinus S-6 mm long and nearly as thick; petiolar nectaries not seen; rachis of each pinnae 16-26 cm (one of the pair a little shorter than the other), the interfoliolar segments 6— 11 cm; [ft pulvinules 6.5-11 x 2.5-3 mm, coarsely wrinkled; Ifts ovate-elliptic from inequilaterally cuneate or cuneate-attenuate base, deltately acute, the larger ones +25-32 x 9-12 cm; venation prominulous on each face of blade but mote pronounced on lower one, the subcentric midrib giving rise on each side, in lower '4 of blade, to 2 strong secondary nerves incurved-ascending long beyond midblade, the tertiary connecting venules subhorizontal-scalariform, generating a sinuous reticulum of veinlets.
Axis of fl-spikes, including short peduncle, +12 cm, the spreading sessile fls well separated along it, bracts deflexed, subulate <1 mm, deciduous; fl-buds pyriform; perianth brownish-ochroleucous, puberuJent with subappressed hairs 0.1-0.15 mm; calyx shallowly campanulate-patelliform, broader than long, 20.7-1 x 2-2.2 mm, the depressed-deltate teeth at most 0.25 mm; corolla 5—-6-merous, broadly trumpetshaped mm, 4.5-5 mm diam at limb, the tube finely striate when dry, the lobes erect, ovate 2.3-3 mm, unequal; androecium not seen fully expanded, +!3-merous, the stemonozone 0.7-1 mm, the lobed intrastaminal disc 0,5-0.6 mm; ovary subsessile, slenderly compressed-ellipsoid, puberulent on lower half, glabrous distally.
Pods unknown.
In understory of wet tropical forest, in moist alluvial soils, 230-250 m, known only from upper valleys of Rios Napo and Curaray in provs.
Napo and Pastaza, Ecuador, and on Rio Corrientes just across the border in Loreto, Peru, within 0°55'-2°30'S, 76°10'— 20°W. — Map 26. — FI.
VILI-IX. Zygia heteroneura has the long spikes of dull whitish flowers that are familiar in sympatric Z. coccinea var. oriunda but differs in greatly elongated leaflet-pulvinules, a characteristic venation, and twice as many stamens per flower, The venation of the leaflets recalls that of the leaf-blade of Abuta grandifotia (Martius) Sandwith; two strong nerves arising from each side of the midrib close above its base and incurved-ascending nearly to the blade's apex, suggesting in fact a quintuplinerved Seaf-blade with scalariform tertiary venulation.
A taxon starts here.
17, Zygia dissitiflora Barneby & Grimes, sp. noy, Z. picramnioidem habitu simulans et ei manifeste affinis, sed stipulis elongatis 9-12 (nec 1-3) mm usque longis, utriusque pinnae foliolis 3-5 (nec 7-9), 15-32 (nec 11-14) cm usque longis, calyce plefumque 2-3 (nec +1-1.3) mm longo, necnon patria infra 100 m in silvis Pacificis diversa. — COLOMBIA.
Valle: Bajo Calima, +10 km NW of Buenaventura, 50 m, 11 Apr 1987 (fl), A. Gentry & al. 56775, — Holotypus, MO 3475638; isotypus, NY. — Ibid., 1] Apr 1987 A. Genry 56783 (MO 2476204).
Slender macrophyll rrees 3-10 m tall with tronk 3-5 cm diam and minutely puberulent but glabrescent homotinous branchlets and lf-axes, the stiffly chartaceous brown-olivaceous glabrous Ifts sharply penninerved and reticulate, subconcolorous, the greatly elongated, remotely spicate or incipiently racemose units of inflorescence ascending in fascicles from knots on annotinous or older wood.
Stipules (few seen) narrowly lanceolate +1—3 mm; axillary restingbuds of stiff, loosely imbricate, narrowly lanceolate 3-nerved scales +3-7 mm.
Lf-formula i/244, the Ifts normally 10 per If (but some smaller upper lvs with one or both pinnae 3-foliolate); petiole including discolored pulvinus 8-30(-50) x 3-5.5 mm; a sessile, shallowly cupular, thick-rimmed nectary +3,5 mm diam at apex of petiole and similar but smaller ones between each Ift-paic; rachis of pinnae 8-23 cm, the interfoliolar segments 3.5—10 cm; Ift-pulvinules 5-1! x 1,3-1.7 mm; Ifts distally accrescent, in outline broad-elliptic or elliptic-obovate from ineguilateral, broador narrow-cuneate base, abruptly acuminate, the furthest pair 4(12-)15-32 x 5.5-14 cm, 2-2.9 times as long as wide; yenation sharply prominulous dorsally, less so ventrally, the costa a little forwardly displaced from midblade, the major incurved-ascending secondary nerves +5-9 on each side of the costa, the proximal 1-2 of them on posterior side produced to or beyond midblade and expiring short of the often loosely revolute margin, the tertiary and reticular venulation sinuous.
Axis of fl-spikes, including short peduncle, 3.5-5 dm; bracts linear-lanceolate, <1 mm, caducous; fls either subsessile, or the lower ones distinctly pedicellate, the pedicel 0.4-1.5 x 0.5-1 mm, the whitish or greenish yellow perianth minutely yellow-brown-puberulent overall, calyx campanulate (1.3-)2-3 x 1.7-2.2 mm, the depressed-deltate teeth 0.3-0.8 mm; corolla 7.5-8 mm, broad-tubular a little dilated at the limb, the erect ovate lobes unequal, the longest mm; androecium 54-60-merous, 29-31 mm, the stemonozone 0.6-1 mm, the tube 11-12 mm, the lobed intrastaminal disc +0,5 mm, ovary narrowly ellipsoid glabrous; style-tip scarcely dilate, 0.35 mm diam. Pods pendulous, in profile broad-linear 40-52 x 3-3.3 cm, slightly decurved, 16-22-seeded, at first planocompressed and framed by slenderly prominulous sutures but becoming biconvex as the seeds mature, the stiffly leathery, lignescent valves dull brown, glabrous, smooth or faintly transverse-venulose; dehiscence through both sutures, but the valves only narrowly gaping: seeds obese, 1-seriate, becoming contiguous and truncate at each end by mutual pressure but not imbricate, +3-3.5 x 2.8 x 1.5 em, the testa papery atrocastaneous, pleurogram 0.
In rain forest, 100 m and less, focal in Pacific Colombia, best known from the valleys of Rfos Calima and Yurumangui in lat. 3°25-4°N in dept.
Valle, and by one collection (Feddema 1967, fr., but without complete inflorescence-axis, NY) from the NW arm of dept.
Antioquia S of Chigodoré at 7°45'N. — Nat mapped. — FI.
Zygia dissitiflora resembles Z. picramnioides in its long spikes of whitish flowers but seems specifically distinct in the combination of short leaf-stalks, intricately reticulate and marginally revolute leaflets, and deeply campanulate calyx.
Its leaflets are fewer by 1 pair, but we have too small a sample to show whether the difference is significant or constant.
The relationships, both of one to the other and of both to Amazonian Z. coccinea var. oriunda will need reassessment as the fruits become known.
A taxon starts here.
18.
Zygia picramnioides (Britton & Killip) Killip, Ann. New York Acad. Sci, 35: 19, ad calcem.
1936.
Pithecetlobium picramnioides Standley ex Britton & Killip, Ann. New York Acad. Sci, 35: 192.
1936, — "E] Humbo region, Boyac4, Colombia .
.
.
750 m, March 1933, A. Lawrance 718."
— Holotypus, F ILv.; isotypi, A!, K!, US 2324102!. — Zygia picramnioides (Standley) L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46: S04 (comb. without explanation).
1991, — If simultaneous publication of Pithecellobium and Zygia picramnioides, the second in a correcting footnote, invalidates the combination Z. picramnioides, it also invalidates P. picramnioides, and Z. picramnicides becomes a new species, not a new combination.
Macrophyllous cauliflorous trees 6-9 m with trunk 1.5-2 dm diam, the terete barren foliate branches and lf-axes thinly puberulent with sordid hairs 0.1-0.3 mm, the foliage bicolored, the thinly chartacequs lIfts when dry dull brown and glabrous above, beneath paler and pilosulous along nerves, the long lax spikes of white-stamened fls fasciculate on knots of older wood, their axes densely brown-yellowpilosulous throughout.
Stipyfes firm, lanceolate 9-12 x 2-3 mm, persistent; axillary resting-buds of lanceolate, distally faicate, conduplicately imbricate, internally striate scales +12-18 mm.
Lf-formuia 32-44, the Ifts 14 or 18 per If; lf-stks including pulvinus (2-) 2.5-4.5 cm, at middie 2-4 mm diam; a subsessile button-shaped nectary at apex of lf-stk attaining 4.5 mm diam, a smaller one between furthest Ift-pairs; pinna-rachises 13-26 cm, the interfoliolar segments 4-6 cm; ift-pulvinules stout, im dorsal view 4-7 x 2.4-2.7 rom; Ifts ovate or elliptic-(ob)ovate from inequilaterally base, shortly acuminate and sharply acute at very apex, the larger ones 11-14 x 4.5-6 cm, 2,2-2.6 times as long as wide; venation almost immersed on upper face of Ifts, sharply elevated beneath, the scarcely displaced midrib either straight or gently incurved, giving tise on each side to 8-9 pairs of incurved-ascending secondary nerves weakly brochidodrome close within the plane margin, the first pair produced scarcely or not to midblade, the tertiary connecting venules slender sinuous, not generating a defined reticulum of veinlets.
Axis of fi-spikes, including peduncle, (8-)15—32 cm, the fls well separated along it; bracts deflexed, ovate, scarcely 1 mm, caducous; perianth pale brown, minutely silky overall; calyx sessile or raised on a thickened pedicel <0.3 mm, campanulate 1—-1.3 x 1—-1.4 mm, the depresseddeitate teeth at most 0.2 mm; corolla slenderly tumpet-shaped +8.5 mm, the erect, ovate lobes 2 mm; androecium +60-merous, the tassel (white acc. collector) not seen fully expanded, the length of mature tube therefore unknown; lobed intrastaminal disc +0.3 mm; ovary linear-ellipsoid glabrous.
Pods unknown.
Overhanging a stream in dense forest, near 750 m, at the type locality in mun. Muzo, near 5°35'N, 74°7'W in the W acm of state of Boyac4, Colombia, and formerly near Barranca Bermeja in adj. Santander; reported by Barbosa (1989: 4) from dept.
Valle. — Not mapped. — FI.
III-IV. Zygia picramnioides closely resembles some forms of Z coccinea var. oriunda, except that the latter is exclusively Amazonian in dispersal and has shorter leaf-stalks, <1.5 cm (as opposed to 2.5-4,5 cm) in larger leaves.
Fruits, of course, may yet provide supportive characters.
A taxon starts here.
19, Zygia multipunctata Bameby & Grimes, sp. Nov., inter species affines laxispicatas cis-Andinas foliolis (utriusque pinnae 7) dorso dense minutim punctatis unica, a Z. picramnioide ultecius perianthio fere glabro et androecio 27-40 (nec +60)-mero distat. — COLOMBIA.
Antioquia, mun. Anori: along Rio Anorf, 28 km SW of Zaragoza, near mouth of Quebrada La Tirana, 9 Apr 1977 (f1.), WS.
Alverson (with S. White & J. D. Shepherd) 386. — Holotypus, HUA isotypus, NY (on 2 sheets), Slender macrophyllidious cauliflorous trees +5 m, glabrous except for a few minute trichomes at apex of calyx-teeth and corolla-lobes, the dull olivaceous foliage subconcolorous, the hypophyllum of Ifts densely minutely punctate overall, the tong loose pendulous fl-spikes arising from knots near base of trank.
Stipules and axillary bud-scales scarcely known, lanceolate +1.5(—?) mm.
Lf-formula i/31, Ifts 14 per leaf; petioles including obese nigrescent pulvinis 4-5 cm X 1.3-2.4 mm, subterete; pinnarachises 11-16 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 3-6 em; Ift-pulvinules blackish 3.5—S x 1.5-1.8 mm; lfts elliptic or oblong-elliptic from inequilateral, broad-cuneate base, contracted into an acute acumen +1 cm, the terminal pair 11-16 x 4.5-6.5 em, 2.4-2.5 times as long as wide; venation sharply prominulous dorsally, less so ventrally, the subcentric costa giving rise on each side to S—7 major incurved-ascending secondary nerves weakly brochidodrome within the plane margin, the strongest on posterior side produced about to midblade, the tertiary connecting venules and reticulum of finer veinlets angulately sinuate.
Axis of fl-spikes, including short peduncle, attaining 2-3 dm, the fls well separated along it; bracts submembranous, narrowly ovate 0.4-0.6 mm, deciduous; pedicels drum-shaped 0.2-0.3 x 0.6-0.7 mm, nigrescent; calyx membranous, shallowly obconiccampanulate 0.7-1 x 1.3-1.6 mm, the depresseddeltate teeth not over 0.2 mm; corolla trumpet-shaped 8-8,5 mm, the stemonozone 0.5-0.8 mm, the tube finely striate-nerved, the erect, ovate nerveless lobes unequal, 0.4-1.4 mm; androecium 36—42-merous, 27-40 mm, the tbe 19.5-24 mm, the white tassel 8-16 mm; intrastaminal disc shallowly lobed 40.4 mm, ovary linear-ellipsoid glabrous; style attaining +4 cm, slightly dilated into the poriform stigma.
Pods unknown.
Riverbanks and cliffs at margin of wet forest, 500-1200 m, known only from the valleys of Rios Anori and Barroso, near 75°-76°W in NE Antioquia, Colombia.
Not mapped. -— FI, III-V. Zygia multipunctata resembles Z. picramnioides in general aspect and especially in relatively long primary leaf-stalks, but the perianth is glabrous except for minute cilia (not silky overall), the stamens are fewer (36-42, not 60), and the dorsally punctate leaflets have no match in the genus.
A taxon starts here.
20.
Zygia bifoliola (Rusby) L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46: 495.
1991, Pithecolobiwn bifolialum Rusby, Mem. New York Bot. Gard. 7: 254.
1927. — "([Rusby & White] No. — Holotypus, a unicate spm consisting of a branchlet, 1 If, and a detached fl.-spike, collected in the "Bopi River Valley, Bolivia,' Aug 1921, NY?.
Macrophyllidious, presumably arborescent and cauliflorons, but the full stature not recorded and the attachment of the loosely many-fld spikes not established, glabrous except for remotely puberulent axis of inflorescence, the chartaceous lfts dull-olivaceous.
Stipules firm, deltate-ovate, <1 mm, subpersistent.
Lf formula if; petiole 12 x 1.5 mm, obscurely sulcate; nectary at tip of lf-stk immersed, shallowly cupular 1.3 mm diam, a smaller but similar nectary at tip of each pinna-rachis; rachis of pirmae including pulvinus 7.5-9 mm, its terminal appendage subulate 2.5 mm, lit-pulvinules +3 mm; Ift-blades broadly ovateelliptic from inequilaterally narrow-cuneate base, acutely short-acuminate, +18 x 8 cm, 2.2 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the very gently incurved, bluntly prominulous midrib giving rise on each side to +8 major incurved-ascending secondary nerves, the intercalary secondary and tertiary venulation weak, Rachis of inflorescence attaining 4.5 dm, the mutually remote fls subhorizontal, appearing sessile; bracts lance-attenuate 0.5.7 mm, deciduous; pedicels discolored, broader than long, 0.3-0.5 x 0.6 mm; perianth glabrous, the calyx nerveless, the corolla +15-striate; calyx submembranous, shallowly campanulate +1 mm, the teeth mm; corolla tubular 10.5-11.5 mm, scarcely dilated distally, the erect lobes unequal 0.6-2.2 mm; androecium 55-60- merous, 30-32 mm, the tube +17 mm, exserted 5-6.5 mm, the tassel probably pink; intrastaminal disc 0.4-0.6 mm tall; ovary glabrous, Pods unknown, In unrecorded habitat, known only from the type locality in the Bopi valley of Yungas, La Paz, Balivia, between 16° and 16°30'S near 67°20°W. — Not mapped. — Fl, VII. The status of Z. bifolioia rests insecurely on a fragmented type collection, which consists of a branchlet, one amply bifoliolate leaf, and some detached inflorescences, which seem to have been cauliflorous.
Its loose flower-spikes suggest close affinity with sympatric Z coccinea, of which Rusby thought it might be a variety.
Other South American zygias that have similarly simplified leaves differ in capitulate flowers, In bifoliolate Central American Z. confusa, the spikes of white flowers are bome on hornotinous branchlets.
A taxon starts here.
21.
Zygia confusa L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46: 496, fig. 1.
1991. — "COSTA RICA.
Province El Limén, 4.5 km NE of Bribri .
.
.
100 m, 12 March 1978, Utley — Holotypus, MO!. — Pithecellobium confusum (L. Rico) Zamora, Brenesia 36: 130.
1991.
Macrophyllidious trees attaining 12 m with trunk to 2.3 dm diam, glabrous throughout, notable in its genus for bifoliolate leaves and for elongate fl-spikes solitary, geminate, or depauperately paniculate from coeval lf-axils, the stiffly papery olivaceous lfts opaque on both faces, paler beneath.
Stipules firm, triangular-subulate +1.5 mm, deciduous.
Lf-formula i; lf-stks including pulvinus 5-12 mm, at middle +1 mm diam, shallowly depressed ventrally; petiolar nectary at tip of lf-stk and of each pinna-rachis sessile, buttonshaped 0.8-1.3 mm diam; rachis of each pinna 5-10 mm, bearing a single expanded Ift and sometimes (but not in Guatemala or Belize) the rudiment of an anterior blade, the expanded Ift subinequilaterally ovate short-acuminate from broad-cuneate or incipiently semicordate base, 7-17(-21) x 3-7(-9) cm, 1.9-2.4 times as long as wide, the margin plane or faintly undulate; midrib subcentric, giving rise on each side to 4-6 incurved-ascending secondary nerves, the tertiary yenulation almost immersed ventrally, obtusely prominulous beneath.
Axis of fi-spikes, including short peduncle, 7-24 cm, the spike 24—50-fld, the subhorizontal fls well separated along it; bracts triangularacuminate +0.7-1 mm, persistent, fls sessile, glabrous, the perianth greenish white, the androecium white; calyx deeply campanulate 2-3 x 1-1.3 mm, the more or less unequal teeth +0.2 mm; corolla narrowly cylindric 7-9 mm, the ovate teeth 0.6-1.1 mm; androecium 45-60-merous, 12-25 mm, the tube either S—5.5 [northward] or 10-12 [CR] mm, the tassel either +6.5 or 10-13 mm; intrastaminal nectary mm.
Pod (ex char.) in profile linear, gently recurved, terete, gceen, dehiscent valvately along "dorsal suture; seeds unknown.
In upland forest of Belize (Toledo) and Guatemala (Petén), narrowly disjunct in lowland forest of Costa Rica (Limén). — FL.
III (northem population) and V (southern population).
Note that our description is original for the northern populations but taken from the protologue otherwise.
There are differences.
Northern plants have spikes directly from the leaf-axil, the southern have a feebly branched panicle of same origin.
The paraphyllidium (anterior) mentioned by Rico is not seen in the northern population, and the androecium is much shorter there also.
The species is potentially divisible morphologically and geographically into (a) Southern Belize and adjoining Petén, Guatemala: no anterior rudimentary Ift, corolla 7 mm, androecium 12 mm, tube 5-5.5 mm, not exserted, and spikes directly from lf-axil, of upland hill forest; and (b) Lowland Costa Rica (Caribbean): rudimentary second lft, corolla 8-9 mm, androecium 20-25 mm, tube 10-12 mm, shortly exserted, inflorescence few-branched; inundated lowland forest.
Note that b is typical.
A taxon starts here.
22.
Zygia bangii Bameby & Grimes, nom. nov. Pithecolobium taxiflorum Rusby, Mem. Torrey Bot. Club 3(3): 24, 1893. — "[Bolivia.] Yungas, 1890 ([Bang] 625."
— Holotypus, — Non P. faxiflorum (de Candolle) Bentham, 1844. — Equated by L. Rico (1991: 505) with Z. solomonii (Barbosa) L. Rico.
Macrophyllidious trees of unrecorded stature, with gray annotinous branchlets, glabrous except for the spiciform racemes of long narrow crimson fls axillary ta coeval lvs, the Ifts stiffly papery, pallid-olivaceous, a little darker and smoother above than beneath.
Stipules not seen.
Lf-formuia the Ifts 14 per If; lf-stks +32-20 mm, nectary not seen; pinna-rachises 9-13 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments +25—35 mm; Iftpulvinules fuscous +2 mm; lfts moderately accrescent distally, the blades ovate-elliptic from inequilaterally broad-cuneate base, obscurely obtusely acuminate, those of distal pairs +7-9 x 2.5—3.5 cm, 2.6-2.8 times as long as wide: venation asymmetrically pinnate, the midrib subcentric straight, the secondary nerves on each side 5-7, the proximal posterior ones only a little longer and stronger than the rest, the tertiary yenulation weak, the whole venation prominulous only beneath.
Spikes including peduncle +17 cm; bracts lanceolate +0.4 mm, early dry deciduous; fls distinctly though shortly pediceliate, the drum-shaped pedicels 0.3-0.5 x 0.7-0.8 mm; perianth minutely thinly puberulent, the calyx nerveless, the corolla striate; calyx membranous, crateriform, scarcely 0.5 mm, at first shallowly toothed, then ruptured; corolla subtbular 9-9.5 mm, nearly 2 mm diam, the ovate lobes +1.5 mm; androecium 54-merous, 28 mm, the tube +7 mm, the stemonozone 0.5 mm; intrastamina! disc 0,7 mm; ovary glabrous, symmetrically conic at apex.
Pods unknown.
Habitat and precise locality not recorded, the typus vaguely indicated from the Yungas. — Not mapped.
Zygia bangit, like Z. bifotiola, has been known for a century only from the type collection of Pithecolobium faxiflorum Rusby.
Rico bas equated this with Z solomonii Barbosa, which is conventionally cauliflorous, whereas the flower-spikes of Z bangii arise from contemporary leaf-axils.
In this respect Z bangti resembles Z, adoratissima, which may be its nearest relative.
A taxon starts here.
23.
Zygia odoratissima (Ducke) L. Rico, Kew Buil.
46: 504.
1991.
Pithecolobiwn odoratissimun Ducke, Bol. Técn.
Inst.
Agron.
N. 36: 73.
1959, — "[Brazil.] Ad flumen Guaporé Guaporé [state of Rondénia]) in campo naturali ad occidentem loci Conceig&o (infra Principe da Beira), 8-VI-1952, G. A. Black & E. Cordeiro 52-14787:' — Holotypus, IAN n.v.
Slender trees m, glabrous throughout, the ample Ifts moderately bicolored, when dry dull brown-olivaceous, the solitary or geminate flspikes borne on branchlets either close below hornotinous foliage or perhaps at anthesis axillary to coeval lvs.
Stipules unknown, Lf-formula if(-1)1%, the Ifts (4-)6 per If; petioles +7-11 x J-2 mm, shallowly grooved ventrally, charged near top with an impressed cuneiform nectary to 3.5 mm; rachis of pinnae 2-2.7 cm, the lower posterior Ift somewhat below middle; Ift-pulvinules +1.5-2 mm; Ifts elliptic or ovate-elliptic from inequilaterally cuneate base, obtuse or shortly obtusely acuminate, the blades of distal pair +5.5—7 x 2.2-3.1 cm, 2-2.5 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the slightly excentric, dorsally prominulous, nearly straight midrib giving rise on each side to +7-10 fine secondary veins weakly brochidodrome close within the plane margin, the fine tertiary and reticular venules perceptible but immersed.
Axis of inflorescence units, including short peduncles, (3.3-) 4-8 cm, the fls crowded; bracts minute, deciduous; fls sessile; perianth not seen, described (ex char.) as white and highly fragrant, the calyx scarcely I mm, the striate corolla to 4 mm, the androecial tube included.
Pods sessile, in profile faltately oblong, obtuse at each end, 7-9,5 x 2-2.2 cm, planocompressed, +8-seeded, the sutures <1.5 mm wide in dorsal view, sinuously impressed only where an ovule aborts, the leathery-crustaceous valves yellowish green tuming castaneous, smooth but not lustrous, in section +0.5 mm thick; dehiscence not seen; seeds umiseriate along the cavity, well separated, plumply discoid 12-14 mm diam, the testa papery, dul! brown, pleurogram 0.
In campo with scattered crooked trees (cerrado) at +150 m, local on both sides of the lower Guaporé River 12°-12°30'S, 64°-64°30'°W, in Ronddnia, Brazil from Principe de Beira) and adj. Beni, Bolivia (prov. Iténez). — Not mapped. — Fl. VI-?, fr.
MI-IV. We have associated Z odoratissima with Z. bangti, which share the feature, unusual in Zygia, of axillary, not cauliflorous, flower-spikes.
The thin-walled pod resembles that of Z cataractae rather than that of most other spicate zygias.
A taxon starts here.
24.
Zygia rubiginosa L. Rico, Kew Bull, 49: 547, fig. 1994. — "COSTA RICA.
Provincia Puntarenas, Q. Jiménez & B. Jaén 680.
.
.
Osa, Reserva Forestal, Golfo Dulce, Alto Los Mogos, Camino Rincén de Osa, 8°47'N 83°35'25"W, 28 March 1989."
— Holotypus, CR n.v.; isotypus, K (not available in 1994).
Trees attaining 10 m with smooth trunk +2 dm dbh, the young branchlets and lf-axes ferruginouspubescent but glabrescent, the fragrant cauliflorous inflorescences pendulous spiciform.
Stipules lanceolate, to 2x 1 mm, striate glabrous.
Lf-formula 34%; petiole 3-12 mm, charged at apex with a circular nectary 1 mm diam, rachis of pinnae 3-7 cm; petiolutes <2 mm; Ifts broadiy elliptic-acuminate from slightly inequilateral base, 2.5-7 x 1,3-3.3 cm, the chartaceous blades subundulate marginally, puberulent on main veins above.
Inflorescence-axis 1011 em; bracts deltate +0.5 mm, persistent; pertanth thinty pobemilent, the cupuliform calyx 1—-1.3 x 1 mm, subtruncate, the white corolla subtubular 5-5.5 mm, ribbed lengthwise; androecitum +30—merous, 10 mm, the tube 6.5 mm, the tassel white, the intrastaminal nectary mm; ovary glabrous, sessile 1.2-2 mm, the style 1.5-2.5 mm.
Pods in profile 9-13 x 0.6-0.8 cm, slightly curved, laterally compressed and 0.55 mm thick, +8-seeded, the thinly papery valves brownish smooth glabrous; seeds 11 x 5.5 x 4 mm, the testa papery brownish, without pleurogram.
In lowland mixed evergreen forest near 100 m, said to be very care, known only from the region of Golfo Dulce in Puntarenas province, Costa Rica. — Not mapped. — FI.
III; fr.
VE
A taxon starts here.
25.
Zygia lehmannii (Harms) Britton & Rose ex Britton & Killip, Ann. New York Acad. Sci. 35: 130.
1936.
Pithecolobium lehmannii Harms, Feddes Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 17; 92.
1921. "
tCoiombia.] .
.
. am Rio Cofre auf dem Hochland von Popayan, 1700-2100 m. (FC.
Lehmann no. — Holotypus, tB = F Neg. 12051; isotypi, K!, NY!.
Amply foliate, cauliflorous trees +6(—?) m, the young branches, all lf-axes and the major veins of hypophyllum of Ifts pilosulous with erect brownish hairs to +0.6 mm, the foliage bicolored, the thin-textured Ifts when dry dark brown but pailid-veined above, paler brown beneath, the dense racemes of relatively large (reportedly scarlet) fls shortly pedunculate, arising solitary from knots on trunk and branches.
Stipules lanceolate 2-10 mm, dorsally pilosulous like stem, forming a loose perule at tip of homotinous stems, but those subtending developed lvs early caducous.
Lf-formuta the lfts 9-13 per pinna; lf-stks 1.8-3 cm, charged at apex with a subsessile, shallowly cupular nectary +1 mm diam; rachis of pinnae 10-15 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments +2-3 em; lft-pulvinules in dorsal view +2 mm, but the Ifts appearing subsessile in ventral view, lfts proximally decrescent, subequilaterally lance-elliptic from shallowly semicordate base, slenderly acuminate or caudate, the longer ones 7-22 x 1.6-7 cm, 2.9-4.3 times as long as wide; venation asymmetrically pinnate, the nearly straight and centric midrib giving rise on posterior side to +5—6 and on anterior side to as many as 9 major secondary nerves weakly brochidodrome close within the plane margin, the first 1-3 secondaries on posterior side longer and stronger than the rest, the connecting tertiary and reticular venules faint.
Peduncles 8-25 mm, sometmes imbricately bracteate at base; raceme-axis stout, 25-40 x 3 mm, the fls subcontiguous; bracts linear-subulate +1.5 mm, either persistent or decidous; pediceis (1-)2—4 mm, perianth minutely puberulent, either overall or only on corollalobes, nowhere striately nerved; calyx hemispherical or shallowly campanulate 1.6-2.5 x mm, the deltate teeth +0.15 mm; corolla subtubular 15.5-20 mm, at orifice 3.5-6 mm diam, the erect, lanceolate cr ovate-triangular lobes 3.3-5 x 2.5-3 mm; androecium 60-120-merous, +4—5 cm, the tube 2-7 mm; intrastaminal nectary +] mm tall; ovary at anthesis glabrous, sessile, obliquely conic at tip; stigma 0.25 mm diam, Pods unknown.
Tn moist montane woodland at 1700-2800 m, local between I°N and 3°30'N in the Andes of Colombia: on left affluents of Rio Cauca between Popaydn and Cali (depts.
Cauca and Valle); and on the E slope of Cordillera Oriental above Mocoa (dept.
Putumayo). — Not mapped. — FL.
II-V(—?). — Guasca de pomo.
A taxon starts here.
26.
Zygia hernandezii (Barbosa) L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46: 501.
1991.
Pitheceliobium hernandezii Barbosa, Caldasia 14: 401.
1986. — "COLOMBIA, Cundinamarca, 200 m de la carretera que de Zipacdén conduce a Cachipay .
.
.
18 Jun 1982, C. Barbosa 785."
— Holotypus, Barbosa 1785 ex parte, 18 Jun, fl. & fr., COL 3410301; paratypi, from type locality, Barbosa 1785 ex parte, 19 Jun, leaves, COL 284054; J. Hi. idrobo & J, Herndndez 1543, COL 72399).
Pithecellobium hernandezii sensu Barbosa, 1991: 324.
Macrophyllidious narrow-crowned trees 5-10 m with trunk attaining +2 dm dbh, the young stems, stipules, and lf-axes densely softly pilosulous with fine brownish hairs to 0.5-0.7 mm, the thinly chartaceous, dull olivaceous Ifts puberulent along principal nerves, otherwise glabrous, the short dense racemes of reddish fls borne on trunk and some annotinous branchlets below the current foliage.
Stipules narrowly lanceolate or lance-caudate 5-13 (-"16") x 1-2 mm, 3-5-nerved, tardily deciduous.
Lf-formuta petiole 2,4-3.2 cm, at middle 1.2-2 mm diam, charged at apex with a subsessile, cupular thicktimmed nectary +1-1.5 mm diam; pinnae widely ascending, the rachis 6-16 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2-3.5 cm, the ventral groove bridged; Iftpulvinules in dorsal view +2.5 cm; Ifts subaccrescent distally, the blades lance-elliptic from inequilateral (antically semiacute, postically semicordate) base, slenderly acuminate, the distal ones 7-11 x 2-4.3 cm, 2.5-3.7 times as long as wide, midrib straight or a trifle incurved distally, only slightly forwardly displaced from midblade, pinnately branched, the major, incurved-ascending secondary and all tertiary and reticular venules finely prominulous on both faces.
Peduncle and raceme-axis together +2 cm, the rachis to 85-fld, 10-12 x 1.2—1.8 mm; bracts linearoblanceolate +1 mm, caducous; pedicels 14.3 x 0,3-0.45 mm; fls homomorphic 5-merous, the perianth finely minutely subappressed-pilosuious overall, the corolla finely +20-striate; pedicels mm, calyx hemispherical 1.5-1.8 x 1.8-3.1 mm, the depressed-deltate teeth 0.5-0.8 mm, the sinuses between them commonly more deeply split in age; corolla tubular-trumpet-shaped 9-14 mm, at top of tube +3--5 mm diam, the ovate lobes 2-3 mm; androecium 30-34 mm, the stemonozone 1.6—1.8 mm, the tube 5.5—6 mm, the tassel ted; intrastaminal nectary 0.50.9 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous.
Pods pendulous, in profile broadlinear 17-44 x 1.8-2.3 cm, laterally compressed but bicanvex when distended by the 14-24 obese seeds, the valves thin-textured and brittle when ripe, externally densely brown-velutinous overall; seeds contiguous along the cavity and tnincate at each end by crowding, in broad view 18-22 x 12-15 mm, the papery testa dull brown, wrinkled, lacking pleurogram.
In microhabitat unreported, near 1900-2100 m, known only from the type locality on the headwaters of Rfo Apulo near Zipacén, at 4°45'N, 74°25'W on the W slope of Cordillera Oriental in Cundinamarca, Colombia. — Not mapped, — Fl. fr.
VI. XI], the full cycle unknown, — Girasol, rayado, Zygia hernandezii closely resembles Z lehmannit in foliage and indumentum and seems to differ at anthesis only by slightly smaller flower and distinctly fewer stamens.
The elongate velutinous fruits of Z. hernandezii are remarkable, but whether they are diagnostic is contingent on discovery of those of Z. letunannii, which are still unknown.
The species was named in honor of one of its discoverers, J. I.
A taxon starts here.
27.
Zygia andaquiensis (Barbosa) L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46; 495.
1991, Pithecellobiwn andaquiense Batbosa, Caldasia 14: 401.
1980. — "COLOMBIA, Caqueté, Morelia 75°45'W], 150-300 msnm .
.
.
K. von Sneidern 1225 — Holotypus, COL Referred in protologue to ser. Callozygia, and said to be distinguished by ample subcoriaceous Ifts with obtusely acuminate apex, by inflorescences papery when dried, arxi by low-elevation habitat (150-300 m).
Lfts said to be S—6 pairs in Latin diagnosis, only 5-6 per pinna in Spanish description.
Inflorescence 75-100-fld, racemose, to 8 cm long, peduncle to 2 em, pedicels to 3 mm; calyx 3-merous 4 mm; corolla 17-21 mm (1); androecium 63-merons, 24-25 mm, tube 0.5 mm.
Known to us only from the protologue.
The epithet andaquiensis is not explained.
A taxon starts here.
28.
Zygia vasquezii L. Rico, Kew Bull, 46: 506, fig. 2L-N. 1991. — "PERU.
Department of Ucayali, Prov. Corone] Portillo, Leoncio Prado (Yarina cocha), 74°35'W, 08°20'S, 200 m...
14 May 1984 [Rodolfo] Vasquez — Holotypus, K!; isotypus, "MO," not found there in 1993.
Macrophyllous cauliflorous shrubs +3 m, glabrous except for thinly strigulose inflorescence, the foliage subconcolorous, dull olivaceous on both faces, the Ifts plane papery, the units of inflorescence compactly racemose.
Stipules firm, triangular-lanceolate +3 x LS mm.
Lf-formuta lf-stk (one seen) +5 x 3 mm, the nectary immersed; pinnae of unequal length, the rachis of longer one 13.5 cm, the longest interfoliolar segment 5 cm; an immersed nectary at insertion of each pair of Ifts; lft-pulvinules 3-3.5 mm; Ifts gently accrescent distally, the blades elliptic from inequilaterally cuneate base, shortly acuminate, the distal pair x 6 cm; venation pinnate, the subcentric midrib gently incurved, +8-10-branched on each side, the nerves ventrally immersed, dorsally prominulous, Axis of racemes including short peduncle +3 cm, the receptacle 7-10 mm, nearly 1.5 mm diam; bracts 0.5 mm, persistent; pedicels 1.5-2.5 x 0.5 mm; perianth finely strigulose overall; calyx shallowly campanulate 42 x 2.5 mm, weakly 5- nerved, the depressed-deltate teeth +0.35-0.8 mm, unequal; corolla narrowly claviform +9 mm, faintly 20-nerved, the lobes nearly 2 mm, recurved at apex; androecium 37-40 mm, +74-merous, the stemonozone 1.2 mm, the tube 16.5-11.5 mm, the tassel pink; intrastaminal nectary +1 mm; ovary at anthesis pallidPods unknown.
In seasonally flooded forest near 200 m, known for certain only from the type locality near 8°20'S, 74°35'W, in prov. Coronel Portillo of dept.
Ucayali in Amazonian Peru. — Not mapped. — Fi.
V(—?).
Zygia vasquezii is said in the protologue to differ from itself in short pedicels (2 mm) and strigulose, urceolate-clavate corolla; and from Z. megistocarpa (its nearest relative, even though a member of sect. Macrophylla [not sect. Callozygia]) in the larger corolla (diagnosis).
But paradoxically the corolla of megistocarpa was described by Barbosa as 12-14 mm, and that of Z vasquezii by Rico as 9 mm.
Presumably minore should have been majore.
The protologue of Z. vasquezii calls for 5—7 pairs of leaflets per pinna, a slip for 5-7 leaflets.
The poor specimen at NY (Rauh-Hirsch cited as differing only in shorter staminal tube, has only 5 leaflets (not pairs) per pinna, Its identity is doubtful.
A taxon starts here.
29.
Zygia juruana (Harms) L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46: 501.
1991.
Pithecolobiien juruanum Harms, Verh.
Bot Vereins Prov. Brandenburg 48: 162.
1907, — "Brasilien: Amazonas-Gebiet, im Walde bei Marary, Jurna (E. Ule no. 5062—Sept. — Holotypus, 'B = F Neg. /2021; isotypus, K!.
Macrophyllidious cauliflorous frees 4-2G m with terete pallescent branchlets, except for brownishpuberulent inflorescence and nascent innovations glabrous throughout, the ample, stiffly papery Ifts when dry iustrously brown-olivaceous above, a little paler dull beneath, the inflorescence composed of condensed capitula arising either directly from knots on trunk and branchlets or assembled into short efoliate pseudoracemes.
Stipules (deciduous, little known) triangular-lanceolate 1-2.5 mm, sometimes basally thickened, not striate.
Lf-formuda the Ifts mostly 3 or 5 per pinna, the whole If foliolate, the proximal pair(s) either opposite or not; lf-stk very short and stout, including pulvinus 4.5-8 x 2-5 mm: nectary at tip of lf-stk sessile, round or thombic 1.8—3.2 mm diam, a similar smailer nectary at tip of each pinna and between lf-pairs when these are opposite; rachis of pinnae 4-12(-15) cm, one of the pair often shorter than the other, the furthest interfoliolar segments 2.5-9 cm, the proximal one much shorter; pulvinules (3-)4-8 mm, becoming grossly wrinkled; Ift-blades broadly lanceto ovateelliptic from inequilaterally narrow-cuneate base, shortly acuminate, the distal pair x 5-10 cm, (2.1-)2,3-3.3 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the dorsally prominent, subcentric and straight midrib giving rise on each side to +5-8 major (and few secondary nerves weakly brochidodrome well within the plane or weakly revolute margin, the first 1 or 2 secondaries on posterior side of midrib not or scarcely longer and stronger than the rest, the tertiary and reticular venulation immersed or almost so above, weakly prominulous beneath.
Inflorescence when fully developed @ short simple pseudoraceme of 6-14-fld capitula, but the primary axis often not extended and the individual peduncles emergent directly from knots; peduncles 3-13 mm, the receptacle +1.5-4 mm; bracts <1 mm, persistent; fis sessile, the whitish or red-tinged perianth puberulent overall, the calyx externally veinless, the corolla-tube faintly striate; calyx deeply campanulate (2-)2,5—6 x 1,4-2 mm, the teeth 0.4 mm or less; corolla subcylindric 7-9 mm, the lance-ovate, often unequal lobes 0.9-2,1 mm; androecium 40-60- merous, 16-19 mm, the tube 7.5-10.5 mm, exserted 0-2 mm, the tassel pink or carmine; intrastaminal nectary 0,4-0.45 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous; stigma poriform.
Pods solitary, sessile, narrowly oblong +10-13 x 3.5-4 cm, shallowly lunate or almost straight, the stout sutures scarcely prominent, very shallowly if at all undulate, the nearly plane, rigidly pithy-lignescent valves becoming when ripe dull brown, smooth or finely wrinkled-tumulose but not yenose, glabrous; dehiscence tardy, along both sutures, the valves narrowly gaping to release the seeds; seeds (of sect. Zygia, few seen) in broad view +2.5 em diam. In seasonally flooded forest (tahuampa, varzea) below 200 m, of seemingly bicentric dispersal: scattered on upper affluents of the Amazon in NE Peru (Loreto) and equatorial W Brazil (Amazonas, Acre); and on the lower Amazon and immediate tributaries in Par4. —- Map 26. — FL, YI-LX; ff. — Jarandeua da fotha grande.
A taxon starts here.
30.
Zygia macbridii (Barbosa) L, Rico, Kew Bull. 46: 501 ("'macbridei,' the altered spelling unexplained and unjustified).
1991.
Pitheceflobiien macbridii Barbosa, Caldasia 14: 398.
1986. — "PERU, Loreto, Mishuyacu, cerca a Iquitos , .
.
Oct-Nov 1929, G. Klug 572 — Holotypus, NY!; isotypus, F n.v.
Macrophyllidious cauliflorous trees 4-1 m, glabrous except for the inflorescence and fruit, the ample, stiffly chartaceous Ifts brownish-olivaceous, scarcely paler beneath, the short fl-spikes fasciculate on knots of annotinous branchlets and older branches.
Lf-formula i/1%, the Ifts 6 per If, the odd proximal posterior lft of each pinna about half as long as the terminal pair and inserted well below mid-rachis, often close above the pinna-pulvinus; petioles 1-9 x 2.54.5 mm, often as broad as or even broader than long; nectary between pinna-pulvini sessile, round or deltate, plane 1.7-2.6 mm diam, and a similar one between each terminal pair of pulvinules; rachis of pinnae (3-)4-7.5 cm; lIft-pulvinules in dorsal view 3.5-7 x (1-)1.7-3.5 mm; Ifts elliptic, either shortly or attenuately acuminate at each end, the distal pair (12-)14-24 x 5-8.5 cm, 2.3-3,.8 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the almost straight midrib centric or almost so, giving rise on each side to 5-8 major (and random intercalary) secondary nerves incurved-ascending and feebly brochidodrome well within the plane margin, the first 2-3 on posterior side of midrib either scarcely or perceptibly stronger than succeeding ones, the connecting tertiary and reticular venulation random and weak.
Spikes subsessile, +7-25-fld, the axis 9-26 mm; bracts 0.8-1 mm, persistent; perianth whitish, finely minutely strigujose overall, the calyx externally nerveless, the corolla only weakly or not externally nerved (not striate); calyx campanulate (1.4)1.8-3.5 x 1.2-1.8 mm, the depressed teeth 0.2-0.4 mm; corolla either tubufar oc moderately dilated in distal third, the erect, ovate-triangular lobes 11.7 mm; androecium 32-33-merous 21-24.5 mm, the tube 10-13 mm, exserted 1-3,5 mm, the tassel pink of lilac-purple, intrastaminal disc 0.45-1.7 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous, symmetrically conic at apex, stigma poriform 0.2 mm diam. Pods pendulous from the trunk or branch, sessile, in profile oblong or broad-linear 4.5— 11 x 2.3-2.8 cm, obtuse apiculate, straight ar slightly decurved, 2-7-seeded, planocompressed becoming low-convex over seeds and shallowly depressed between them, the thick, rigidly pithy-ligneous valves framed by obaisely prominulous sutures, the yentral suture sulcate lengthwise, the ripe valves brown, densely minutely pilosulcus-tomentulose overall; dehiscence of the genus; seeds obese, contiguous and mutually deformed, +2 cm diam and nearly half as thick.
In moist forest but often above the floodline, 100-230 m, apparently localized in the upper Amazon basin in SW prov. Maynas, adj. prov. Requena,
A taxon starts here.
31.
Zygia trunciflora (Ducke) L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46: 506.
1991.
Pithecelobium trunciflorum Ducke, Arch. Jard, Bot. Rio de Janeiro 4: 30.
1925.—",, . in regione fluminis Tapajoz medii .
.
. prope cataractas Mangabal [5°6'S]. legit] A. Ducke 18-81923 (H[erb.] J[ard.] Bot.) Rlio de Janeiro] n.
16786). — Holotypus, presumably at RB, though Rico (1.c.) indicated IAN-MG; isotypus, 1B = F Neg. 1220 [sphalm. sub nom. "Pithecolobium tenuiflorum''').
Pithecotobium trunciflorum sensu Ducke, 1949: 44, Macrophyllous cauliflorous trees 3-12 dm with trunk 6-10 cm dbh, glabrous except for silky-puberulent fls and frs, the chartaceous lf-blades brownalivaceous subconcolorous, the units of inflorescence shortly spiciform, solitary and fasciculate on knots along trunk and defoliate branches.
Stipules (caducous, few seen) lanceolate +1.5-3 mm, firm, not striate.
Lf-formula petioles x 2--4.5 mm; nectary at tip of petiole (little known) sessile, shallowly concave, to 2-3.5 mm diam; rachis of longer pinnae 11-20 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 4-9 cm; Ift-pulvinules 3-9(-10) mm; lfts subaccrescent distally, the blades broad-elliptic or obovate-elliptic from inequilaterally cuneate base, shortly acuminate, the distal pair 14-26 x 4.5-9.5 cm, 2.5-3,1 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the subcentric and nearly straight midrib giving rise on each side to 5—7 major (but slender) incurved-ascending secondary nerves, these together with tertiary and reticular venules subimmersed on upper face, finely prominulous beneath.
Inflorescence units 15-28-fld, the axis including short peduncle 1-3 cm; bracts ovate-triangular <1 mm, becoming dry deciduous; fs either sessile or contracted at base into a pedicel to 0.5 mm, 5-merous, the perianth finely silkypuberulent overall; calyx deeply campanulate 3-3.6 x 1,2-1.5 mm, the depressed-deltate teeth 0.15-0.3 tm; corolla tubular, a little dilated distally, 8-11.5 mm, the lobes 1.2-1.7 mm; androecium 30-48- merous, 18-26 mm, the mbe 8-12.5 mm, the stemonozone 0.6-1.3 mm, the tassel pink, the nectarial disc mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous, strigulose after fertilization.
Pods pendutous, subsessile, in profile gently decurved, 13-25 x 1.3-1.4 cm, 13-22-seeded, the rigidly lignescent valves planocompressed, slightly elevated over cach seed, framed by sutures +2.5-4 mm wide in dorsal view, densely minutely gold-brown-silky overall; dehiscence and seeds unknown.
In forest on-terra firme, below 200 m, not recorded as riparian, apparently local in middle Amazonian Brazil, described from the Tapajéz valley in W-centr. Par&, best known from Manéus and vicinity in E Amazonas. — Not mapped. — FI.
V, VII-X1.
This resembles Z. juruana in foliage, but the inflorescence-units are spiciform and the pod is very long and narrow (1.3—-1.4, not 3.5-4 cm wide) and densely brown-gold-strigulose overal! (not glabrous).
It differs from compatriot Z, ampla by inflorescence structure.
A taxon starts here.
32.
Zygia megistocarpa (Barbosa) L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46: 1991.
Pithecellobiwn megistocarpum Barbosa, Caldasia 14: 404.
1986. — "Peru, Amazonas, rfo Cenepa, vecinidad de Huampami, cerca Macrophyllidious cauliflorous trees 3-8 m, glabrous except for slender, shortly spiciform inflorescence, the ample chartaceous lfts sublustrous above, dull and a little paler beneath, the woody fruits of exceptional size and girth.
Stipules unknown.
L/- formuia petiole obese, drum-shaped +5-8 x 4-6 mm; no lf-nectary seen (material incomplete); pinna-rachises +7—-17 cm, the relatively smal] proximal exterior lft well below middle; Ift-pulvinules obese smooth 8-12 x 4-5 mum; ifts elliptic or ellipticobovate from strongly inequilateral, narrow-cuneate base, shortly acutely acuminate, the distal pair 25-32 x 9-16 cm, 22-3 times as long as wide; venation asymmetrically pinnate, the straight costa a little excentric, the major secondary nerves +7—9 on each side, the first 2-3 on posterior side of blade incurvedascending beyond midblade and expiring short of anastomosis, those of anterior side more nearly equilong, all secondary veins sharply prominent dorsally, less so ventrally, the connecting tertiary venules faint.
Spikes arising singly, directly from knots on defoliate branches, to 20-fld, the axis together with very short peduncle to 3 cm; bracts triangular acute +1 mm, persistent; fls sessile, the whitish perianth finely minutely strigulose overall, nowhere striately nerved; calyx campanulate, including solid broad-cuneate base 2 x 1.7 mm, the depressed-deltate teeth scarcely 6.3 mm; corolla 11.5 mm, tubular for nearly % its length, then abruptly dilated, irregularly cleft into ovate lobes +2 mm; androectum +100-merous, 31 mm, the tube nearly as long as corolla, the filaments in several ranks, pink distally; ovary conic distally, puberulent at anthesis; stigma poriform 0.2 mm diam. Pods subsessile, in profile broad-linear, gently decurved, 13-35 x 4.5-5 cm, bicarinate by obtusely dilated sutural ribs, 12—16-seeded, the rigidly pithyligneous valves low-convex over each seed, in section +4 mm thick, the epicarp light brown or yellow-fawn glabrate, becoming finely tessellate and scurfy, the endocarp smooth; seeds plumply compressed ovoid becoming distorted by mutual pressure and obliquely rhomboid +2.5-4 x 2,5-3.2 x 1-1.3 em, the dull brown, papery crustaceous exotesta +0.2-0.3 mm thick in section, pleurogram 0.
In primary wet forest near 200-250 m, known only from the valley of Rio Cenepa, tributary of the lower Maraiién River at +4°30'S, 78°10°W in prov, Bagua of dept.
Amazonas, Peru. — Map 27. — Fl. — fwanchi sampiji, wainim.
A taxon starts here.
33.
Zygia inaequalis (Willdenow) Pittier, Trab.
Mus. Com. Venezuela 2: 69 = Arb. Arbust.
Legum. 1; 39, without full citation of basionym.
1927. inga inaequalis Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow, Sp. PI. 4; 1019.
1806. — "Habitat ad — Holotypus, a single If + detached fls., B-WILLD /9042, seen in microfiche! = F Neg, /200; isotypus, If only, P-HBK!. — Mimosa inaequalis (Willdenow) Poiret, Encycl. Suppl. 1: 44.
1810. — Pithecolobiwn inaequate (Willdenow) Bentham, Trans.
Linn. Soc. London 30; 596.
1875, — Feuilleea inaequalis (Willdenow) O, Kuntze, Revis.
Gen. Pl. L: 188.
1891.
Macrophyllidious cauliflorous trees and treelers, fertile when m tall, with trunk potenally to 2 dm dbh but commonly <i dm, variably pubescent, the nascent stems, lf-stks and inflorescence-axes commonly sordid-pubenilent, sometimes densely so, the léts often glabrous or glabrous except for ventrally puberufent midrib, or ciliolate on veins of hypophylium, or (in central Amazonian Brazil = Zygia longiramosa) rather densely pilosuious on one or both faces, the chartaceous Ifts moderately bicolored, most often dark brown-olivaceous and lustrous above, a little paler dull beneath (but sometimes subconcolorous), the inflorescence composed of usually dense but sometimes incipiently spiciform capitula of fragrant, whitish or pinkish fls fasciculate on knots of trunk and annotinous branchlets, the filament-tasse! almost always pink or carmine.
Stipules deltate, triangular, or lanceolate, most easily seen on nascent terminal shoots, there commonly striately 3-8-nerved, either deciduous or persistent, when persistent becoming basally thickened and nerveless externally.
Lf-formula the well-devetoped pinnae mostly 5-9-foliolate, the small proximai posterior lft occasionally wanting; lf-stks including pulvinus 2-10-12) x 1.3-3.5(-7) mm, sometimes nearly as wide as long, nectary at tip of lf-stks sessile, in outline round or obtusely rhombic, plane or shallowly cupular thick-rimmed, 1.2-3.7 mm diam, a smaller but otherwise similar nectary between t-2 distal or between all Ift-pairs; rachises of the one pinna-pair widely divergent, straight or forwardly incurved, that of the longer pinnae 5—14(—22) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2-5.5(-8) cm; Ift-pulvinules in dorsal view mm; Ift-blades elliptic, ovate-, or obovate-elliptic from inequilaterally cuneate or (when broad) shallowly semicordate base, obtuse or short-acuminate, the distal pair x 2.5-8(-9) cm, 1.9-3.2 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the slightly excentric, straight or gently incurved midrib giving rise on each side to (3-) 4-7(-8) major (and few intercalary) secondary nerves, the first 1-2 on posterior side of midrib variable in strength, often produced to or beyond midblade, sometimes shorter, al! sharply prominulous beneath, either immersed or depressed above, the tertiary and reticular venules usually faint, sometimes prominulous on upper face.
Peduncles ordinarily several per fascicle, mm, sometimes subtended by a rudimentary lf-stk with nectary: capitula 7-19- fld, the receptacle 1-5(-10) mm; bracts <1 mm, persistent; perianth either glabrous, or glabrous except for orifice of calyx and tips of corolla-lobes, or finely thinly brownish-pubenilent overall, whitish or pinktinged fading brown, the calyx weakly 5- or 10- cibbed, the corolla-tube striate; calyx (1.4-)2-4.3 x (0.9-)1.2-1.6 mm, at least 2 mm long in the Jarger fls of any plant; corolla (5.2-)6—9.5(-10) mm, the ovate lobes 0.9-2.1 mm; androecium (20-)30-56-merous, (17-)22-31 mm, the mbe 8.5-11.5 mm, exserted 1-4 mm; nectartal disc 0.25-0.45 mm, Pods almost always solitary, sessile or nearly so, highly diverse in length, in number of seeds, and in curvature independent of length, when well fertilized broad-linear in profite, either straight, or retrofalcate, or evenly recurved into a ring (exceptionally also twisted), 1.8-2.6(—3) cm wide but varying from 3-4.5 cm long and 1—-2-seeded to 18(-25) cm long and to 18-seeded, the minutely, often densely puberulent or exceptionally (Z. foreroi) velvety-tomentulose valves at first planocompressed becoming low-convex over mature seeds, rigidly lignescent in ripening, the exocarp dull brown, rugulose or tumulose, sometimes transversely splitting to reveal the paler brown fibrous mesocarp, this at least 1 mm thick at middle of valves; dehiscence tardy, through the seminiferous suture, the valves at first narrowly gaping, ultimately explanate; seeds (few seen fully ripe) transverse, not imbricate, bluntly rhombic in broad view and +16—-22 mm diam, the papery brown testa finely wrinkled, pleurogram 0.
In seasonally flooded riverine forest and riverbanks near the floodline, 0-200 m, widely interruptedly dispersed in tropical South America: Orinoco and Amazon basins in E Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador, Peru, and N Bolivia, thence extending into interior of the Guianas, and W through the Maracaibo basin in Venezuela to the lower Magdalena, Sucio, and San Juan valleys in N Colombia, there extending S along the Pacific coast to Valle. — Map 28. — Flowering nearly year-round, but most profusely at high water. — Carbén (Amazonian Colombia); bushillo shimbille (Peru), ingd-rana (Brazil); chipero, pichindé (NW Colombia).
Zygia inaequalis, variable in pubescence and some other features, seemingly consists of numerous more or less localized races, the most notable being one with leaves softly pilosulous dorsally (= Z fongiramosa of centr. and S-centr, Brazil and adj. Bolivia).
Pithecellobium foreroi, from Chocd, was cecognized by Barbosa as most closely related to PF. inaequate but notable for smailer calyx (2-2.5 mm) and densely silky-tomentose pod 3-4 cm wide at maturity, We found in the whole range of Z. calyces varying from 2 to 4.3 mm, and the fruit of the isotype of F forervi is at most 21 mm wide.
Rico (1991) accepted Z. foreroi as an independent species but in 1992 annotated Fuchs & Zanella 22084 from Rio Baudé (NY), which has the densely browntomentose fruit of P. foreroi, as Z. inaequalis.
A taxon starts here.
34.
Zygia guinetii L. Rico, Kew Bull, 46: 500, fig. 2A-F. 1991. — "PERU.
Depto Loreto: Prov. Maynas, Mishana, (Rfo Nanay), 73°35'W, 03°55'S, 130 m...
Vdsquez, Jaramillo & Criolto 5373" — Holotypus, K (n.v,); isotypus, MO?; paratypi, Li.
Williams 727, 754, 755, all Fl. Amply macrophyllons shrubs 2-6 m with terete pallid branches, the young stems and lf-axes setulose with straight spreading, lustrous brown trichomes to 0.7-1 mm, the papery Ifts dull olivaceous, paler beneath, usually pilose along major nerves of epiphyllum and thinly pilose along most nerves of hypophyllum (this rarely glabrous), ciliolate, the few-fld capitula of fls borne in condensed, quasifasciculate pseudoracemes on knots of annotinous and older branches, most pedunctes subtended by a rudimentary lf-stk with nectary.
Stiputes (1 seen) triangular acute +4 x 2 mm.
Lf-formula lf-stks 6-8 x 2.5-4 mm; nectaries at top of petiole and between each pair of Ifts sessile, shallowly cupular 1.5-4 mm diam, rachis of longer pinnae 11-15 cm, the further interfoliolar segment 4.5-7.5 cm: Iftpulvinules coarse discolored 5-8.5 mm; Ift-blades broadly elliptic from antically semiacute, postically semicordate base, attenuately acuminate, the distal pair 20-27 x 7-9 cm, 2.9-3.3 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the gently incurved midrib together with incurved-ascending secondary and transverse tertiary venules all depressed on ventral face and sharply prominulous dorsally (the blade surface consequently incipiently bullate), the strong incurvedascending secondary nerves 6-8 on each side of costa.
Peduncles 2-4 mm, capitula +6-9-fld, the receptacle +1.5 mm diam; bracts triangular <1 mm, persistent; perianth appearing glabrous but the orifice of calyx and lobes of corolla minutely puberulent; calyx symmetrically or asymmetrically campanulate 0.6-1.5 x 0.8-1 mm, the teeth (equal or one longer) at most 0,3 mm, separated by wide sinuses; corolla slenderly teumpet-shaped (not 8.2-9.5 mm, the lance-ovate lobes 1.7-1.8 mm; androecium 32-42-merous, 20-30 mm, the tube 11-12 mm, the stemonozone +1 mm, the intrastaminal nectary 0.6- 0.7 mm; ovary subsessile, at anthesis glabrous.
Pods unknown.
In seasonally flooded riparian forest (tahuampa) +130 m, known only from lower rios Itaya and Nanay, tributaries of the Amazon SW of Iquitos in prov, Maynas of dept.
Loreto, Peru. — Not mapped. — Fi.
VI-VII. — Mitllua-shicshi, Among macrophyll zygias of upper Amazonia with capitulate units of inflorescence and at most 5 leaflets per pinna, Z. guinetit is notable for relatively thintextured, incipiently bullate leaflet-blades with midtib and principal secondary nerves depressed ventrally and sharply raised dorsally.
The ferruginous hairs stressed in the protologue are sometimes short, sparse, and confined to the stronger nerves of the hypophyllum.
Rico's illustration of the corolla (fig. 2C) correctly shows it slenderly trumpet-shaped, not as it is characterized in the Latin diagnosis and commentary.
Assessment of relationships must be postponed until the fruit is known.
A single leaf (Urrego 1167, MO) collected on the Caquet4 River close to the mouth of the Quinche River in Amazonas, Colombia, is reminiscent of Z. aguinetii in texture, coloration, and venation of the leaflets but different in densely minutely punctate hypophyllum.
It may represent an undescribed taxon.
A taxon starts here.
35.
Zygia peckii (B. L. Robinson) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl. 23: 39.
1928.
Inga peckii B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 49: 502.
1913. — "British Honduras, Prof.
Morton E. Peck, n.
673."
— Holotypus, GH!; clastotypus (slides + NY!. — Pithecolobium belizense Standley, Publ. Field Mus. Nat. Hist. 4: 212, 1929; non P peckii Blake (1917).
Pithecotobium belizense sensu Standley & Steyermark, 1946: 71, Coarsely macrophyllous trees attaining 4-9 m, with gray trunks 1-2 dm dbh, except for minutely puberulent peduncles glabrous throughout, the stiffly papery Ifts dark dull brown-olivaceous above, a little paler beneath, the shortly pedunculate capitula of fragrant whitish fls arising in fascicles from knots on trunk and older branches and randomly from annotinous lf-axils immediately below current foliage.
Stipules lanceolate or triangular-lanceolate 2-8(-11) mm, striate only when young, soon becoming dry, firmly papery, dorsally smooth, deciduous.
Lf formula i/]'4— 2%, the Ifts in some plants stabilized at 3 per pinna, in others either 3 or 5; petioles stout x 1.8-3.5 mm, charged at top with a sessile, buttonlike, plane or small-pored nectary (1.4-)1.6-2.8 mm diam; rachis of pinnae 4-12 cm, the 1 or the further of 2 interfoliolar segments 3.5-10 cm, the proximal posterior lft attached close above pinna-pulvinus; Ift-pulvinules in dorsal view 4-7 mm, smooth or obscurely wrinkled; Ift-blades ovate-elliptic, elliptic, or broadly lanceelliptic, from inequilaterally cuneate or cuneateattenuate base, very shortly or obscurely acuminate, the distal pair 12-22 x 4-9 cm, (2-)2.2-3.4 times as long as wide; midrib subcentric, straight or slightly incurved, pinnately 7-11-branched on each side, the primary and the incurved-ascending secondary nerves commonly depressed on upper face and prominulous beneath, the tertiary and reticular venuies faint or imperceptible above, finely raised beneath.
Capitula 6— 12-fld, the peduncle 2-11 mm, the receptacle 1.5-3 mm; bracts lanceolate or ablong-ovate 0.6—1.7 mm, persistent, fls sessile, the (4-)5-merous perianth glabrous, the calyx weakly 5-nerved, the corolla faintly striate; calyx deeply campanulate 2-3,2 x 1.3-1.8 mm, the teeth at most 0.4 mm, often subobsolete; corolla 6.5-8 mm, the ovate Iobes 1—1.8 mm; androecium 13-20 mm, 42-50-merous, the tube 7.5-11 mm (exserted 1-3 mm), the stemonozone +0.7 mm, the intrastaminal nectary 0.4-0.55 mm; ovary substipitate, glabrous.
Pods sessile, in profile broad-linear, gently retrofalcate, when well fertilized 9-15 x 2.44 cm and 8-11-seeded, the toughly coriaceous or lignescent valves planobiconvex, smooth glabrous, the sutures remotely undulate only where ovules abort, the ventral one elevated as a narrow wing +1.5-2,5 mm wide; seeds (few seen) oblong-disciform to 25 x 18 mm, uniseriate along the cavity (not imbricate), the papery testa lustrous castaneous, more or less crumpled, pleurogram 0.
On stream banks and in swamps adjoining mangrove, below 300 m, apparently localized in S Belize (distr. Belize and Toledo), adj. Guatemala (Petén, Alta Verapaz, and Mexico (Chiapas, Tabasco). — Map 29, — FL HIM; fr.
V-VI. — Turtlebone (in Belize, a name applied to several congeners).
A taxon starts here.
36.
Zygia cognata (Schlechtendal & Chamisso) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl. 23: 39.
1928, inga cognata Schlechtendal & Chamisso, Linnaea 12: 560, 1838. — "[MEXICO.
Veracruz:] in regione calida inter Colipam et littora maris [on the Gulf lowlands near 19°SS'N, 96°40°W] .
.
. (Schiede)."
— Holotypus, C. W. Schiede 676 in HAL 73728!. — Inga (7) sp., Schlechtendal & Chamisso, Linnaea 5; 592.
1830. — Pithecolobium cognanan (Schlechtendal & Chatmisso) Bentham, London J. Bot. 5: 107, 1846. — Feuilleea cognata (Schlechtendal & Chamisso) 0.
Kuntze, Revis.
Gen. PL. 1: 187, 1891.
Macrophytlous ivees 3-8 m with scaley trunk(s) and terete brownish lenticellate branches, the young stems and lf-axes often brownish-puberulent, but the stiffly papery lfts glabrous, the foliage when dry dull brownish-olivaceous, paler beneath, the loose capitula or short racemiform spikes of whitish fls arising from knots on trunk and branches, below the current lvs, Stipules lanceolate or ovate-triangular 1,5-6 mm, weakly striate when young, scon firm smooth, deciduous, Lf-formula lf-stks 4-9(-15) x 1.5-6 mm, charged at top with a sessile buttonlike nectary +1-2.5 mm diam; similar but smaller nectaries at insertion of some Ifts; rachis of longer pinnae 7-17(-20) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2-5.5 cm; lft-pulvinules (2-)2.5-5.5(-7) mm; lits accrescent distally, the blades elliptic or ovate-elliptic from inequilaterally cuneate base, either acutely or obtusely short-acuminate, the distal pair 1-22 (-27) x cm, 2.4-3.3 times as long as wide; midrib subcentric, straight or gently incurved, giving tise on each side to 7-9 major incurved-ascending secondary nerves, the tertiary connecting and reticular venules prominulous on bath faces.
Of rescence 9-18-fld, the peduncle 2-12 mm, the floral axis 3-16 mm; bracts ovate 0.6-1.2 mm, persistent; pedice] 0-1.2 x 0.45-0.6 mm; perianth (4-)5-merous; calyx shallowly or deeply campanulate 1.2-2.3 x 1-1.3 mm, the teeth 0.1-0.4 mm, often rudimentary; corolla tubular, scarcely dilated distally, 7-10.5 mm, the ovate, often unequal lobes 0.9-1.4 mm; androecium 17.5-20 mm, 42-60-merous, the tube 9.5-12.5 mm (exserted 0,5-3.5 mm), the stemonozone obscure, the intrastaminal nectary 0.35-0.5 mm, ovary at anthesis glabrous.
Pods either sessile or shortly Stipitate, in profile broad-linear, straight or almost so, when well fertilized 13-25 x 1.9-—2.4 cm, 9-16- seeded, laterally compressed but becoming plumply biconvex and often low-corrugate lengthwise, bicarinate by straight or low-undulate sutures, the lignescent valves densely minutely strigulose-tomentulose averall with brown or golden-brown hairs; dehiscence through both sutures, the valves narrowly gaping; seeds imbricate along the cavity, plumply disciform, in broad view +24 x 18-20 mm, the testa papery brittle, lustrous dark-castaneous, loosely enveloping the embryo, pleurogram 0.
In wet forest and on riverbanks and wooded shores, 5-300 m, local in SE Mexico (Veracruz, on Gulf lowlands below 20°N; N Oaxaca; Usumacinta valley in N Chiapas; Caribbean coast. of Quintana Roo), NE Guatemala (Petén), and N Belize (Orange Walk and Belize distr.). — Map 30, — Fi.
H-VII; fr. ripe HI, VII-VOL, probably nearly throughout the year.
Without the fruit Z cognata is scarcely distinguishable from Z peckii, but the leaflets are commonly more numerous by 1-2 pairs.
A taxon starts here.
37.
Zygia englesingii (Record) Record, Trop.
Woods 63: 6 ("Engelsingii').
1940.
Inga englesingsi Standley ex Record, Trop.
Woods 17: 27.
1929 [1 Mar]. "
[E C. Englesing) No. 205; Yale No. 13297."
= Inga englesingii Standley, Publ. Field Mus. Nat. Hist. 4: 211.
1929 [24 Oct]. — "Nicaragua: Region of Bragman's Bluff [= Puerto Cabezas], 1928, F C, Englesing 205.' — Holotypus, F 5797321; isotypi, NY (fragm.)!, Y 73297. — Pithecellobium englesingsti (Record) Standley, Trop.
Woods 34: 40, 1933.
Very amply, coarsely macrophyllous trees 6-9 m, hardly distinguishable when sterile or in flower from Z. stevensonii or Z. rhytidocarpa, but seemingly different in the (seldom collected) broad, planocompressed, thinly puberulent fruit, glabrous except for sometimes minutely pilosulous lf-axes and more or less strigulose inflorescence, the loose capitula or short spikes of fragrant, white or pinkish either whiteor pink-stamened fls shortly pedunculate from knots on trunk and on lately defoliate branches.
Stipules (few seen) lanceolate or lance-acuminate 5-7(-?) mum, early dry deciduous.
Lf-formuta lfstks 4-24 x 2-4,5 mm; petiolar nectary sessile +3(—?) mm diam; rachis of pinnae 1.5-5 dm, the longer interfoliolar segments (3.5-)5-10.5 cm; Ift-pulvinules 3-6.5 mm; lfts accrescent distally, the blades broadly elliptic to ovateor obovate-elliptic from inequilaterally narrow-cuneate base, shortly acuminate, the distal ones 17—38(—'40") x 6-12(-14) cm, 2.8-3.8 times as long as wide: venation as in Z stevensonit, the major incurved secondary nerves 6-8 from each side of subcentric midrib.
Units of inflorescence 7-12-fld, the peduncle +4-8 mm, the floral axis 5-12 mm, bracts ovate, scarcely 1 mm, persistent; perianth (4-) 5-merous, either glabrous except for tip of corollalobes or finely strigulose overall; calyx campanulate 2-4 x 1.1-2 mm, the teeth (or some of them) either ovate to 0.4 mm or subobsolete; corolla tubular, barely dilated distally, 8.5-12.5 mm, the lobes +2 mm; androecium 22-25 mm.
50--60-merous, the tube 11-14 mm, as long as corolla or shortly exserted, the tassel either white (with pink anthers) or pink; intrastaminal disc +0.5 mm; ovary subsessile, glabrous.
Pod (Grayum 4336, not quite ripe) in profile narrowly oblong 12 x 4 cm, planocompressed, margined by sutures +5 mm wide in dorsal view, the dark brown ligneous valves obscurely cross-ribbed, under magnification papillate and minutely strigulose; dehiscence and seeds unknown.
In wet woodland, from near sea level to 1500 m, best known from the Caribbean slope of the Cordillera Central in Costa Rica, extending E along rivers to the coast, there extending N in Nicaragua to Puerto Cabezas and just into Panama (Bocas del Toro). — Map 30. — Fi.
TII-VII—?).
A taxon starts here.
38.
Zygla rhytidecarpa L. Rico, Kew Bull, 49: 549, fig. ZA-E. 1994. — "HONDURAS, Departamento Atlantida, about 15 m E of La Ceiba, Yuncker et al. 8553."
— Holotypus, K n.v.; isotypi, NY!, BM, MO, not in 1994; paratypi, J. Saunders 361, Lundell 16169, both Macrophyllidious arborescent shrubs attaining 9 m but early fertile, glabrous except for sometimes sordidly puberulent branches and some !f-axes or dorsal venation of Ifts, the papery lvs dull olivaceous, paler beneath, the shortly pedunculate or subsessile capitula of whitish fls arising from the main trunk or from lately defoliate pallid branchlets, the whitish perianth thinly pubetulent.
Stipules (few seen) firm, ovate +4-7 mom, persistent.
Lfformula /2'4-444, the Ifts 5-9 per pinna, sometimes of even number; petioles stout, 2.5—5 x 2-3,5 mm, shallowly sulcate; nectary at apex of petioles depressed-cupular +1.5 mm diam, that at tip of each pinna-rachis (and sometimes between Ift-pairs) similar but smaller; rachis of pinnae (S-)6.5-17 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 3.5 cm; ift-pulvinules stout 2-3.5 mm; Ifts strongly accrescent distally, the blade (cbjovateor oblongelliptic from inequilateral, antically cuneate, postically narrow-cordate base, shortly obmsely acuminate, the furthest pair +13-17 x 3.5-7 cm, 2.44 times as long as wide, the margin weakly undulate when dry; venation pinnate, the nearly straight, subcentric midrib giving rise on each side to 5-8 incurved-ascending secondary nerves, the first on proximal side hardly stronger than the rest, the tertiary venules very finely prominulous.
Peduncles 2-5 mm; capitula (Lundell 16169) +7-15-fld, the receptacle 1-1.5 mm diam; bracts obtusely deltate <1 mm, persistent; calyx sessile campanulate, externally nerveless 2.3-3 x 1 mm, the obtuse teeth +0.2 mm; corolla 6.5-7 mm, the tube cylindric, the ovate lobes +0.7 mm; androecium (in one bud) 24-merous, becoming +17.5 mm, the tube 10 mm, the intrastaminal disc 0.5 mm; ovary glabrous.
Pods pendulous from the trunk, sessile, in profile when fully fertile +7-seeded (by abortion of ovules sometimes pseudostipitate), massively linear-oblong, straight or slightly recurved and attaining 27 x 3.5 cm, at apex abruptly decurvedapiculate, nearly 3 cm thick, the valves ligneous, not seen when fresh, when ripe and dry biconvex, coarsely deeply alveolate-reticulate overall, the ridges between areolae acute, randomly anastomosing; dehiscence valvate, through the ventral suture, the valves only narrowly gaping; seeds uniseriate or narrowly imbricate, obese, oblong compressed or variably distorted by mutual pressure, the papery testa dark brown, fragile, pleurogram 0, In forest, 180-450 m, apparently localized in Honduras (Colén, Atintida) and Guatemala (Petén). — Not mapped. — Fl. in VII; fr. ripe VI-VII, but full cycle not known,
A taxon starts here.
39.
Zygia brenesii (Standley) L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46: A495.
1991.
Pithecolobien brenesti Standley, Publ. Field Mus. Nat. Hist., Bot. Ser. 18 (Fl. Costa Rica): 506.
1937. — "[COSTA RICA.
Prov. Alajuela:] entre Rfo Jess y Alto de la Calera de San Ramon, 1,000-1,050 meters, [Alberto M.] Brenes 5496."
— Holotypus, collected 1 Mar 1922, F!; isotypus, NY!.
Arborescent shrubs with the gray bark, ample lfts, and cauliflory of sect. Zygia, reportedly attaining 15 m but seen in fl when 3 m tall, glabrous except for brownish-puberulent young lfand inflorescenceaxes, the papery bicolored, dull brown-olivaceous above, paler beneath, the loosely racemose or subumbellate, relatively long red fls bome either on the main trunks, or on slender annotinous branchlets, or on both.
Stipules lanceolate 2-6.5 mm, 3-5-nerved when young, early papery and deciduous.
Lf-formula U(24-)342-44, each pinna (5-)7-9-foliolate, petioles stout +3-6 x 2-3 mm; nectary at top of petiole cupular 1-1.7 mm diam, sometimes incipiently stipitate; rachis of pinnae 5.5—18 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2-5 cm; Ift-petiolules +2-3.5 mm; lfts irregularly accrescent distally, the blades inequilaterally elliptic, lance-elliptic, or (ob)ovate-elliptic from asymmetrically cuneate base, short-acuminate, the distal pair in ampler lvs 7-19 x 2.6-7 (in some smaller sun-leaves only 5.5 x 2.5) cm, (2-)2.2-3.4 times as long as wide; venation subsymmetrically pinnate, the midrib either straight or gently incurved, the secondary nerves +5-8 on each side, the tertiary and reticular veinlets weakly raised on both faces.
Racemes +9-15-fld, the simple axis, including short peduncle, 6-35 mm; bracts <1 mm, persistent; pedicels at and after anthesis (1.2-)1.6-4(-5.5) x 0,4-0.6 mm, sometimes scarcely perceptible in bud; perianth (4-)5- merous, red, glabrous except for sometimes micropuberulent corolla-lobes, the membranous calyx faintly 5-nerved, the corolla weakly striate in age; calyx campanulate or deeply campanulate (1.8-)2-4 x 1.6-2 mm, the depressed-deltate or subobsolete teeth 0.1- 0.4 mm; corolla cylindric a wifle dilated upward, (16.5-)18-21 mm, the narrowly lance-ovate lobes 2.3-4 mm, not over half as long as corolla; androecium 52-56-merous, the stemonozone 1.2-3(-5) mm; intrastaminal nectary 0.6-1 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous.
Pods not seen.
In wet forest or forest remnants, commonly along streams, 800-1050 m, apparently confined to the environs of San Ramén, in prov, Alajuela, Costa Rica. — Not mapped. — FI.
II-V. The diagnostic syndrome of Z. brenesti consists of: shortly racemose fis; relatively long, red corolla; and pluristaminate androecium with proportionately short tube and red tassel.
Zygia brenesti and Z. palmana are here regarded as conspecific.
Standley described Pithecolobium brenesit as similar to Nicaraguan P. englesingii but largerflowered; he offered no diagnostic remark about F brenesti, Rico transferred both to Zygia, but with characteristic insouciance vouchsafed no supporting evidence. ft seems implausible that two narrowly sympatric and endemic species that share a flower unusual elsewhere in their genus could coexist in Alajuela; but proof is contingent on study of the fruits.
A taxon starts here.
40.
Zygia morongii Barneby & Grimes, sp. nov. Pithecellobium caulifloram sensu Morong & Britton, Ann. New York Acad. Sci. 7: 102.
1892; Hoo, Darwiniana 23: 535, fig. 3.
1981; non PB cauliflorum (Willdenow) Martius, 1837, a quo imprimis foliolis subsymmetrice penninerviis et leguminis post pedicellum late retrogyessi valvulis lignescentibus abstat. — Paraguay.
Gran Chaco, 31 Dec. 1888 (fl. fr.), E Morong 360. — Holotypus, NY: isotypus, Freely branched, macrophyllidious arborescent shrubs 3-10 m with pallid terete annotinous branchlets, the young stems and lf-axes thinly (seldom more densely) pilosulous or puberulent but often glabrate in age, the Ifts (dry) bicolored, brewn-olivaceous sublustrous above, a little paler beneath, glabrous except in yernation, the loose capitula of white, pink-stamened fis shortly pedunculate from defoliate knots on annotinous and older wood (rarely also from a few annotinous, still fotiate nodes), Ssiputes triangular or lanceolate 1-5 mm, firm subpersistent, weakly +5-nerved only when young.
Lf-formula i/1VxX-2%), the Ifts in most lvs exactly 6, in random lvs 8 or 10; petioles 3-6 x 1.4-2 mm; nectary near tip of lf-stk sessile, plane or shatlowly cupular 1—-1.6 mm diam, a smaller one at tip of each pinna-rachis; rachis of pinnae 1.3-4 cm, the 1 (or longer of 2) interfoliolar segments 1—2.2 cm, the small odd posterior lft inserted close above pinnapulvinus; lft-pulvinules 1.7—-3 x 0.8-1.5 mm; Ifts inequilaterally elliptic or ovate-elliptic from asymmetrically cuneate or shallowly semicordate base, very shortly obtusely acuminate, the distal pair 4-8.5(-10) x 2-3.8(-5) cm, +2-2.3 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the straight, slightly excentric midrib giving rise on each side to 5-8 incurved-ascending secondary nerves feebly brochidodrome well within the plane margin, these and the tertiary and reticular venules prominulous on both faces of blade but more sharply so beneath.
Peduncies 1.5-6 mm; capitula 3--14-fld, the axis 1.5-3 mm; bracts 0.5-0.9 mm, persistent; perianth glabrous except for minute puberulence at mouth of calyx and at tip of corolla-lobes, the calyx weakly 5- or 10-nerved, the corolla-tube finely striate; calyx campanulate (1-)]1.5—3 x 1-1.6 mm, the depressed-deltate teeth often unequal, 0.1-0.4 mm; corolla narrowly trumpet-shaped mm, at top of tube !.
7-2.8 mm diam, the ovate subacute lobes 1.3-2.1 mm; androecium 43-53-merous, 20-23 mm, the tube exserted 0.5-4.5 mm, the tassel pink; stemonozone 1-1.4 mm; disc 0.3-0.6 mm.
Pods solitary, sessile, attached laterally above the broadly rounded base, in profile oblong to broad-linear 3-13 x 2-2,9 cm, usually gently recurved, obtuse apiculate, +3-5- seeded, planocompressed becoming low-convex over seeds, framed by thickened but scarcely prominent sutures, the rigidly pithy-ligaeous valves smooth, dullbrown, minutely often densely brownish-puberulent, in section 1.1--2 mm thick; dehiscence follicular, the ventral suture narrowly gaping; seeds subcontiguous but scarcely imbricate, round or elliptic in broad view, +15-16 mm diam, the testa brown papery, lacking pleurogram.
In swampy woodlands and riverine forest of the Paraguai—Parana basin below 120 m, in NE Argentina and centr. Paraguay (within 25°-28°S, 55°30'-59°W): in Argentina from far E Formosa and Chaco E across N Corrientes into SW Misiones; thence weakly N into centr, Paraguay; disjunct in Mato Grosso do Sul (mun. Corimb4) near Ponte do Areiao mapped). — Map 28. —— Fl. IX-VI. — Arbol moneda, granadilio de rio, guard-peré.
Zygia morongii has been known for a century but has consistently been mistaken for our Z. atifolia var. communis, from which it differs in conventionally pinnate venation of the leaflets and in the lignescent pod.
The leaves are compatible with Z. cataractae and the fruits almost with Z. inaequatis, but the combination is alien to both.
The leaves are indistinguishable technically from those of the sympatric Z. cataractae, but this has narrower, glabrous flowers, shorter calyces, and the thin-walled pod of its species.
Herein we follow Hoc (1981) exactly in delimitation of the two localized zygias that she described and figured as Pithecellobium cauliflorum and P. divaricaswan but differ in our interpretation of their affinities and consequently in the nomenclature adopted.
A taxon starts here.
41, Zygia ampla (Bentham) Pittier, 3rd Conf.
Interam.
Agric.
Caracas 359.
1945.
Pithecolobium ampium Bentham in Martius, Fl. Bras. 15(2): 451.
1876. — "Habitat in sifvis 'Gapo' prope Manaos, prov, do Alto Amazonas: Spruce n.
1852."
— Holotypus, K (hb. Bentham.)!. = NY Neg. 2028; isatypus, 'B = F Neg. 779), Slender macrophyllidious cauliflorous trees 4-10 m with trunk attaining 1.5 dm dbh, the young stems, lf-axes, and inflorescence densely sordidpuberulent but the Ifts commonly so only along principle nerves (the intervenium rarely also remotely puberulent), the inflorescence when fully expanded a short, simple or few-branched pseudoraceme of capituliform spikes, these short to laxly elongate.
Stipules (few seen) deltate-triangular 1-1.5 (—?) mm, not striate, caducous.
Lf-formula each If 22(—26)-foliolate; lf-stks 3-10 x 1.6-5 mm; nectary at tip of petiole sessile, shallowly cupular or almost plane, 1.6-3 mm diam, similar but smaller nectaries between some distal or between all lft-pairs; pinnae divergent almost at right angles from the petiole, thence either straight or incurved, often of uncqual length, the longer one 11-21 (—28) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 3—-6.5(-9) cm; pulvinules 2-5 x 0.8-2.2 mm; Ifts usually accrescent distally, narrowly to broadly ovate-elliptic from inequilaterally broadcuneate or shallowly semicordate base, shortly acuminate, the distal pair (8—)9-20(-27) x 3-9.5 cm, 2.2-3,4(-3.7) times as long as wide; venation prominulous only on lower face, the subcentric, straight or nearly straight midrib giving rise on each side to 2-5 major incurved-ascending (and indefinite weak intercalary) secondary nerves, the first or both first and second of these on posterior side (in proportionately ample Ifts on both sides) of midrib produced well beyond midblade, the tertiary and reticular venulation faint or ill-defined. inflorescence more or less compound but very variable in extension of axes, the primary one 1.5-5 cm, sometimes scarcely developed, the peduncles 1-5 mm, all or most of them subtended by a rudimentary lf-stk with nectary; capitula 8-20-fld, the sessile fls either contiguous or well separated, the floral axis becoming 1.5-7 mm; bracts evate acute, <1 mm, persistent; perianth brownpuberulent overall, the calyx faintly 5-nerved, the corolla-tube finely striate; calyx campanulate, sometimes deeply so, 0.9-1.9(-2.4) x 0.7-1,3 mm, the teeth at most 0.2 mm, often subobsolete; corolla tubular, only slightly dilated at the limb, 4.5-6.7(-8) mm, the erect lobes 0.6—1.3 mm; androecium 26-38(—-46)- merous, 16—20(-23) mm, the tube mm, exserted 1-2.8 mm, the tassel pink or crimson; intrastaminal disc 0,3-0.45 mm; ovary glabrous, tapering into the style.
Pods (few seen) sessile, broadlinear, straight or gently retrofalcate, 8-18 x 1.8-2.8 em, planocompressed, to 12-seeded, the stiffly leathery, dark brown, low-venulose valves framed by shallowly undulate or nearly straight sutures 1.5-3 mm wide, at first densely puberulent, glabrescent; dehiscence and seeds unknown.
In annually flooded forest, mostly below 200 m but ascending to 600 m in Guyana, scattered through centr. and E Amazonia between +3°N and in Brazil from the lower Japurd in Amazonas E to the Amazon delta and N Maranhio, N through Roraima just into Guyana (Kanuku Mts., Kuyuwini River), and known from one station on the sources of the Tocantins near 14°50'S in Goids. — Map 31.
Fl. VIIIXiL — Jarendeua de sapo.
A taxon starts here.
42.
Zygla cupirensis (Barbosa) L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46: 498.
1991.
Pitheceliobium cupirense Barbosa, Caldasia 14: 399.
1986. — "VENEZUELA, Estado Miranda, cetro del Bachiller, quebrada Corozal, al sur de Santa Cruz, 10°9'N, 65°48'W, 10 Km por aire desde Cupira, 300-700 msnm, 20-26 Mar 1978, J. A. Steyermark & G. Davidse 16504 fl Holotypus, MO n.v.; isotypus, NY!.
Slender caulifiorous frees of forest understory, with terete pallid branches, the nascent stems, lf-axes and inflorescence minutely puberulent with sordid hairs but the adult foliage glabrous, the thinly papery, dullolivaceous Ifts only a trifle paler beneath, the white or white pink-stamened fls borne in short spikes arising directly from scaley knots on annotinous and older branches. triangular-lanceolate 1-2.5 x 0.6- 1.5 mm, submembranous or thickened in age but not striate externally, deciduous.
Lf-formula i344, the Ifts 7-9 per pinna; petioles 3-6 x 0.6-1.5 mm; nectary between the pair of pinnae sessile round, shallowly cupular thick-rimmed 1.3-2.5 mm diam, similar but smaller ones between furthest 1-2 pairs of Ifts, pinna-tachises 4-11 cm, the ionger interfoliolar segments +2-3 cm; Ift-pulvinules 0.8-3 x 0.8-1.3 mm; Ifts distally accrescent, elliptic or ovate-elliptic from inequilaterally broad-cuneate or semicordate base, shortly acuminate, the distal and penultimate pairs (4.5-)5-9 x 2-4 cm, 2.3-3.2 times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the nearly centric, straight or gently incurved midrib giving rise on each side to 6-9 very slender secondary (and random intescalary) nerves weakly brochidodrome within the plane margin, the tertiary venulation random weak.
Spikes the very slender axis, including short peduncle, not more than 11 mm; bracts deltate 0.5- 0.6 mm; perianth silky-strigulose-pilosulous overall, the corolla tube finely striate-nerved, the calyx and corolla-lobes externally nerveless; calyx subhemispherical 0.6-0.8 x 1-1.2 mm, the deltate teeth 0.2-0.3 mm; corolla tubular, slightly dilated distally, mm, the ovate lobes 0.6-i mm; androecium 32-38-merous, 18-26 mm, the tube 12.5-15.5 mm, exserted 7-9 mm; disc reduced to rudimemary callosities on inner face of androecial tube.
Pods when wellfertilized broad-linear in profile, straight or very gently decurved, to 12-seeded, but often imperfect and narrow-oblong as little as 7 cm and only 2-3- seeded, in either case 22.7 cm wide, narrowed at base into a short neck, abruptly apicufate, planocompressed, the leathery but not rigid valves not over 0.6 mm thick in section, framed by slender sutures at most 2 mm wide, the epicarp dull brown, smooth except for faint random nervation, densely minutely subappressed-puberulent overall; dehiscence and ripe seeds not seen.
In understory of semideciduous woodland at +300-600 m, not recorded from streamside habitats, very local on the Caribbean slope in NE Venezuela: near S border of state of Miranda; and on Paria Peninsula in state of Sucre. — Map.
27. — Fl. VI-VIL.
The epithet refers to the township of Cupira in the state of Miranda.
A taxon starts here.
43.
Zygia cataractae (Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth) L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46: 496, 1991, Inga cataractae Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth, Nov. Gen. Sp. 6(qu): 297, 1824, — "Crescit ad cataractam JavaTiveni, prope Atures Orinocensium [Amazonas, —- Holotypus, so labeled, P-HBK!. — Pithecolobium cataractae (Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth) Bentham, London J. Bot. 3: 213.
1844, Feuilleea cataractae (Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth) O. Kuntze, Revis.
Gen, P], 1: 185, 1891.
Macrophyllidious arborescent shrubs and slender trees, at anthesis (1.5-)2-12(-15, once recorded, Little 84/5, NY, as 25) m tall, commonly several-stemmed from base, the trunk(s) attaining 1-1,5(—"4") dm dbh, the annotinous and older branches pallid, gray or yellowish, the nascent branchlets brown-strigulose, the Lfaxes sometimes and the inflorescence-axes almost always minutely strigulose but the dul) olivaceous, moderately bicolored, stiffly chartaceous Ifts glabrous, the inflorescence composed of capitula ar capituliform spikes of sessile fls arising, either solitary or fasciculate, either directly from knots on trunk and annotinous or older branches or exceptionally from older axils, or rarely assembled into condensed fewcapitulate efoliate pseudoracemes.
Stipuies deltate or tiangular mm, nerveless dorsaily, usually caducous, absent from fruiting specimens.
Lf formula usually i/1%, rarely (and not in all [vs of an individual) i/2, the distal pair about twice as large as the 1(-2) proximal ones; lf-stks x 1.3-2.5 mm; nectary at tip of lf-stk sessile, round (0.8-)1,1-2.7 mm diam, either shallow-cupular or low-convex within a cupular margin, often bug-eaten, a similar but smaller nectary at tip of each pinna; pinna-rachises (0.7-)1.5- em, the posterior ift (or pair of Ifts) inserted well below middle, often close to pulvinus; [ft-pulvinules in dorsal view 2-5 mm; Ift-blades elliptic to ovateor lance-elliptic from more or less inequilateral, either cuneate or semicordate base, shortly acuminate and at very tip either deltately acute or obtuse, the distal pair of larger lvs (6-)8-18(-20) x (2.6-)3-6.5(-8) cm, (-4.4) times as long as wide; venation primarily pinnate, the straight or gently incurved, subcentric midrib giving rise on each side to 6-10 major (and indefinite intercalary) secondary nerves widely incurved-ascending and brachidodrome well within the plane margin, and these to tertiary and reticular venulation usually finely prominulous on both faces.
Peduncies 1-9(—11) mm, mostly arising directly from the cauline knot, a pseudoracemose axis up to 2 cm sometimes developing, its early nodes subtended by a rudimentary lf-stk with nectary; capitula (5-)8-25-fld, the receptacle 1-5 mm; bracts <1 mm, persistent; perianth glabrous or puberulent, the calyx weakly 5- nerved, the corolia-tube delicately but prominulously +15-nerved, the lobes almost nerveless; calyx shallowcupular to deeply campanulate, (0.45-)0.6-2.6 (3.1) x 0.7-1.5 mm, 0,5-2.5 times as long as wide, the teeth minute, not over 0.2 mm, the orifice often merely crenulate; corolla subcylindric (4.5-)5.5-9 (-10) mm, the erect, often unequal lobes 0.5-1.8 mm; androecium (24-)28-S5(-62)-merous 15-22 mm, the tube mm, exserted from corolla 0.5-4 mm, usually white throughout, but the tassel sometimes pink; intrastaminal disc 0.3-0.8 mm tall; ovary subsessile, linear-elliptic, glabrous, the stigma scarcely dilated, +0.1-0.2 mm diam. Pods 1-3 per capitulum, sessile or almost so, in profile broad-linear, variably recurved, either weakly falcate or bent into a circle, when well fertilized 8-28 x 1.4-2.6 om, 8—14-seeded, strongly compressed, the coriaceous, glabrous or excepticnally finely puberulent valves at first green and plane except for a depressed papilla over each seed, becoming brown and low-convex over seeds, framed by longitudinally sulcate sutures; dehiscence tardy, through the ventral suture, the valves narrowly gaping to release the seeds; seeds transverse, compressed but plump, in broad view obtusely rhombic or oblongelliptic, 15-20 x 13-16 mm, the papery testa dull brown, lacking pleurogram, In ciparian woodland subject to flooding, on low riverbanks, in gallery forest, mostly below 250 m but attaining 475 m in Venezuelan Guayana, interruptedly widespread over the Amazon basin, the S half of the Orinoco basin, and the Guianas, between 9°N and 13°30'S latitude, thence rarely Brazil to the headwaters of Rfo Paranaiba in the Triangulo Mineiro; reappearing disjunctly, in a form with relatively small lvs, along the lower Parand4 and adj. Paraguai Rivers in Jat.
27°-28°S, in NE Argentina (SW Misiones, N Corrientes, NE Santa Fe) and contiguous Paraguay; one disjunct record from Pacific Ecuador (Milagro, Guayas). — Map 32, — FI. nearly throughout the year, most profusely VI-X. — Cimbra-potro (Orinoco valley); clavellino, guama de rana (Venezuelan Guayana); alikuyu (Guyana); bushilica, yacushapam ingé branca (N Amazonian Brazil); guard-peré (Argentina, applied also to sympatric Z, morongii).
A taxon starts here.
44, Zygia longifolia (Willdenow) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl. 23: 40.
1928.
Inga longifolia Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow, Sp. Pl. 4: 1010.
1806. — "Habitat in America — Holotypus, a single lf, collected (Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth, 1823: 298) "prope Cavico Bracamorensium, ad tipam fluminis Chamayae, alt. 350 hex, [near 6°S, 79°W in S Jaén, Cajamarca, Peru, at #635 — Holotypus, annotated "3647, B-WILLD 19029, seen in microfiche!. — Feutlileea longifolia (Willdenow) O. Kuntze, Revis.
Gen. Pl. 1: 185.
1891, — Pithecolobium longifoliwn (Willdenow) Standley, Publ. Field Mus. Nat. Hist., Bot. Ser. 4: 212.
1929.
Macrophyllidious cauliflorous trees 6-20(-24) m with trunk attaining 1 m dbh (mostly less), sometimes flowering as arborescent shrubs 2.5 m upward, appearing glabrous and the mature foliage always so, the axes of the inflorescence commonly puberulent, the dull olivaceous lfts bicolored, pale beneath, the fragrant white, either whiteor pink-stamened fls bome in short simple spikes fasciculate on knots along annotinous and older branches.
Stipules depresseddeltate, deltate, ovate or lanceolate, obtuse or acute, 0.8-2.6(-3) mm, nerveless or faintly 1-3-nerved dorsally, deciduous.
Lf-formula all but very occasional depauperate lys exactly 6-foliolate, the distal pair of Lfts about twice as long as the proximal one, this inserted at or usually much below middle of pinna-rachis; lf-stks 2-13(-20, commonly <10) x 0.8- 2 mm, shallowly sulcate ventrally; a round, buttonshaped or shallowly cupular nectary 0,7—2.2 mm diam at tip of lf-stk and a scarcely smaller one at tip of each pinna-rachis; rachis of pinnae (0.7-)1.3-4.5 cm: pulvinule of distal Ifts 1.2-3 mm; blade of Ifts either broadly or narrowly elliptic, elliptic-oblanceolate, or ovate-elliptic, from inequilaterally cuneate base, acute or shortly acuminate, the distal pair (7-)9-16 x 2.2-5(-6.5) cm, (2.3-)2.7-4.8 times as long as wide; venation of Ifts pinnate, the subcentric, straight or almost straight midrib giving rise on each side to 6-10 major (and often random intercalary) secondary nerves, these slenderly prominulous on beth faces or only beneath, the tertiary and reticular venulation faint or fully immersed, Fi-spikes (10-)12-30-fld, the axis including short peduncle mm; bracts ovate acute 0.6-0.9 mm, persistent; perianth glabrous or pubenilent, especially toward orifice of calyx and corolla, the calyx faintly S(-10)-nerved, the greenish white or pinkish corolla-tube striately nerved, the erect ovate lobes nerveless; calyx shallowly or deeply campanulate x 0.8-1,3 mm, the teeth 0.15-0.5 mm, the tube often ruptured by expansion of the nectarial disc; corolla mm, the often unequal lobes 0.5-1.4 mm; androecium 20—30(redoubled, to 54)-merous, 14.5-21 mm, the whitish tube (6.5-)7-10.5 mm, exserted 1-4,5(—-5) mm, variably dilated upward, the tassel white or pink; nectarial disc 0.3-0.6 mm tall, ovary linear, glabrous; stigma poriform, mm diam. Pods 1(-2) per spike, pendulous, sessile or almost so, broad-linear, planocompressed becoming at maturity low-convex over seeds, highly variable in length, width and curvature, nearly straight to strongly falcate and when proportionately iong also randomly twisted, in profile (6-)8-44 x 1.4-2.2 cm and when well fertilized 10- 17-seeded, the prominulous sutures either nearly straight or undulately constricted between seeds, the coriaceous valves dark brown when ripe, weakly venulose, glabrous; seeds ordinarily subvertically descending, in broad view oblong-elliptic 17-29 x 9-13 mm, in some shorter pods (see discussion) horizontal and only 8-13 x 6-10 mm, the papery brown testa finely wrinkled, dull, lacking pleurogram, Riverbanks, gallery woodland, streambed thickets, seasonally flooded mixed forest or palm forest, ascending from the edge of mangrove near sea level into premontane wet forest, in Costa Rica to 600-1250 m, in Colombia to 800-900 m, in Perm to 1150-1500 m, widespread and locally abundant in Central and Andean South America between +15°N and 10°S: NE Honduras S and E to N Colombia and NW Venezuela, thence along the Pacific slope to Piura and Cajamarca and through intermontane valleys and E foothills of the Andes to Junin. — Map 33. — FI. intermittently through the year, but most profusely — Guana (Honduras); sotocaballe or azote-caballo (Costa Rica); apa (Panama); amé, chiparo or chipero, guamo prieto, pichindé (Colombia); buscifia or bushica, chichimbina, samik (Peru).
Some Pensvian specimens, from depts.
Piura (Angule 4114, NY), Hudnuco (Swingle 29A, NY), and Amazonas (Berlin 853, NY) are distinguished by short broad pods +6—13 x 1.7-1.9 cm in which the relatively short seeds afe oriented across (not parallel to) the fruit's long axis.
There is no apparent difference in foliage from other Andean material with the long fruit and descending seeds of what is ordinarily accepted as genuine Z. More observations of flowering and correlated fruiting material are needed, and it must be bome in mind that Humboldt's longifolia, collected in flower, could very well tum out to have fruits of the modified shortened type.
A taxon starts here.
45.
Zygia paucijugata (Lundell) L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46: 504.
1991.
Pithecolobium paucijugatwm Lundell, Contr. Univ. Michigan Herb. 6: 30.
1941. — "MEXICO: Veracruz, at Fortufio on the Coatzacoalcos River, March, 1937, Llewel[!]yn Williams 8290."
— Holotypus, MICH! = MICH Neg. 3809.
Arborescent shrubs attaining 7 m, glabrous except for micropuberulent inflorescence, with terete branchlets, elliptic, dull olivaceous Ifts, and capitula of whitish or greenish yellow fls arising singly or fasciculate from knots on annotinous and older branchlets, exceptionally also from some coeval lf-axils.
Stipules triangular or subulate +1—2,5 mm, caducous.
Lf-formuda if lfts 6-10 per If, lf-stks including discolored pulvinus 4-14 mm, at middle 1-1.6 mm diam; nectary at top of lf-stk sessile 0,8—1.3 mm diam, rachis of longer pinnae 1-5 cm, the one or the further interfoliolar segment +9-25 mm; Hft-pulvinules 1.3- 2.5 mm; Ifts accrescent distally, the blades elliptic or narrowly elliptic from inequilaterally cuneate base, attenuately acuminate, the distal pair 8-11.5 x 2.2-4 om, (2.9-)3.2-4.5(-4.8) times as long as wide; midrib subcentric and nearly straight, giving rise to +5-7 major (but slender) incurved-ascending secondary nerves, the tertiary venulation weak.
Peduncles 6-14 mm; capitula 8-17-fld, the receptacular axis 1.5-3 mm; bracts 0.7-1.3 mm, persistent; perianth minutely puberulent overall or only on calyx-teeth and corollalobes, the corolla 5-nerved in age; calyx campanulate 1.1-2.7 (-"3.2") x 1-1.2 mm, the subulate teeth 0.3-1 mm; corolla 6-8,5 mm, the lobes 0.8-1.2 mm; androecium 14-20 mm, +30-46-merous, the tube 8.5-11 mm, stemonozone 0,35-0.5 mm, intrastaminal disc mm.
Pods (Brigada Vasquez 513, CAS) sessile, broad-linear, straight, planocompressed +13 x 2 cm, the pale-olivaceous thin-coriaceous, glabrous valves framed by nearly straight, micropuberulent sutures 20.5 mm wide in dorsal view, low-papillate over each of 11 seeds, not seen fully ripe.
On riverbanks below 225 m, local in forest of the Atlantic slope in Veracruz and adj. Oaxaca, Mexico (lat. +17°-20°N). — Not mapped.
A taxon starts here.
46.
Zygia conzattii (Standley) Britton & Rose, N. Amer, Fl, 23; 40, 1928.
Calliandra conzatni Standley, Contr. U.S. Natl, Herb. 20: 188.
1919. — "Type .
. [US] no. 763864, collected along the Rio de Pilas, Distrito de Pochutla, Oaxaca, Mexico .
.
.
April 27, 1917, by C. Conzatti (n. — typus, US!; isotypus (e num), attributed to Conzattii & Reko and collected at "Rio NY !. — Pithecolobiwn conzattii Standley, Field Mus. Publ. Bot. 4: 212.
1929.
Macrophyllous arborescent shrubs precociously flowering in understory of swamp forest but attaining 10(-15) m at maturity, with 1-several twisted trunks 1-4 dm dbh and gray branchlets of the genus, glabrous or the young twigs and lf-axes thinly sordidpubenilent with erect-incurved hairs <0.4 mm, the glabrous olivaceous Ifts thinly papery, pallid beneath, the capitula or short dense spikes of small whitish fragtant fls arising from knots on the trunk and from defoliate nodes of annotinous and older branchlets.
Stipules firm, deltate-triangular or subulate 0.6-2 mm, dorsally nerveless or 1-3-nerved, persistent.
Lfformula commonly i/14%-2'%, randomly i/3-34, the Ifts not fewer than 6 or more than 14 per If; lf-stks 1.8—4 x 0.7-2.3 mm; nectary at tip of sessile, shallowly cupular 0.7-1.4 mm diam, those between Ifts similar but smaller or randomly lacking; rachis of pinnae (1.2-)1.6-5(-6) cm, the first posterior lft bore close to base, the longest (furthest) interfoliclar segment 7—24(-28) mm; Ift-pulvinules 1.8-2.1 mm; Ifts strongly accrescent distally, the blades narrowly to broadly elliptic, lance-elliptic, or ovate from inequilaterally cuneate or (when relatively wide) from postically shallow-cordate base, either obtuse or shortly, obtusely acuminate, plane but almost always crenulate at margin, the distal pair in well-developed lvs (4-)4.5-9.5(-11) x (1.6-)2-4,5(-5,5) cm, (1.45-) 1.8-3.1(—3.4) times as long as wide; venation of Ifts subsymmetrically pinnate, the moderately displaced, straight or gently incurved midrib giving rise on each side to S-8(-9) major incurved-ascending secondary nerves, the tertiary and open reticular venulation finely prominulous on both faces.
Units of inflorescence (6—-)7-23(-30)-fld, their whole axis (including peduncle when present) 1.5-11 mm, the peduncle itself O-9 mm, the floral axis 1-11 mm; bracts deltate or broad-subulate mm, persistent; fls sessile, the perianth varying from glabrous to finely puberulent overall, the corolla commonly puberulent on lobes but otherwise glabrous; calyx variable in length, campanulate, deeply campanulate, or cylindric, 0.9-3.3 x 0.7-1 (in one example 3-5) mm, weakly 5-nerved or externally nerveless, the teeth subulate, often unequal, not over 0.3 mm; corolla subcylindric mm, the ovate, sometimes unequal lobes 0.7—1.4 mm; androecium 28-48 (-54)-merous, (9-)10-16(-17.5) mm, the tube (6-) 7.2-16(-17.5) mm, intrastaminal disc 0.3-0.6 mm, ovary at anthesis glabrous.
Pods (7-)9-15 x 1-1.4 cm, (7-)8-13-seeded, in profile broad-linear, nearly straight to evenly recurved (or equivalently contorted) to a full circle, the ventral suture often shallowly undulate, the glabrous coriaceous valves becoming lowconvex over ripe seeds; seeds uniseriate along the cavity, subcontiguous but not imbricate, irregularly discoid-biconyex +11-15 mm diam, the testa dark brown papery, pleurogram 0.
On civerbanks and in swampy lowland forest, mostly below 250 m but ascending occsionally in wet forest to 500 m, locally common in Mexico SE from centr. Veracruz, through N Guatemala, Belize, and N Honduras to NE Nicaragua; in Mexico extending W across the continental divide to S Oaxaca rero. — Map 34. — FI. prolifically II-VIII, sporadically throughout the year. — Quiebra-hacha, sotacaballo, turtlebone; all, in effect, generic names for sympatric zygias of Central America.
A taxon starts here.
47.
Zygia turneri (McVaugh) Barneby & Grimes, comb. nov. Pithecellobiuwn turmert McVaugh, Fl. Novogaliciana 5: 238.
1987. — Jal[isco] .
.
. between Bahia de Navidad and La Manzanilla, MeVaugh 20908."
— Holotypus, MICH n.yv.; isotypi, CAS!, NYt?.
Macrophyllidious trees +10 m tall with gray-white branchlets, bifoliolate lvs, and hemispherical capitula of white fls arising from the axi] of lately fallen lvs, glabrous throughout or becoming so, the ample thintextured Ifts dull olivaceous, paler beneath.
Stipules deltate-ovate acute 0.4—1 mm, in age pallid and thickened but not spinescent, finally deciduous.
Lf-formula i/1; lf-stks 6-24 mm, at middle <1 mm diam; a cupular, round or elliptic nectary 0.7-1.1 mm diam sessile at apex of petiole and of each pinna-rachis, these 3-13(-18) mi; lft-pulvinules 0,6—-1 mm; lfts broadelliptic from inequilaterally cuneate base, shortacuminate, the larger ones 4-8.5(-11) x 2-4 cm, the margin undulate; midrib nearly straight and subcentric, pinnately branched, the slender, widely ascending secondary nerves 4-7 on each side, the tertiary venulation fine and faint.
Peduncies solitary 8-15 mm; capitula 12-22-fld, the receptacle +1.5 mm diam; bracts triangular <1 mm, persistent; fls sessile, the white perianth glabrous except for minutely brown-puberulent calyx-teeth and papillate tip of corolJa-lobes; calyx deeply campanulate +2-3 x 0.7— 1 ma, the teeth 0,2 mm; corolla +7-9 mm, the tube narrowly cylindric, the ovate lobes unequal, 0.5—1.5 mm; androecium +44-merous, 17-23 mm, the tube +13-16 mm, the anthers 0.3-0.4 mm diam; intrastamina] disc 0.5 mm, shallowly lobulate; ovary sessile, glabrous at anthesis.
Pods (immature, ex char.) sessile, in profile broad-linear recurved, planocompressed, the valves puberulent.
In deciduous forest or palm forest below 200 m, local on plains and low hills of the Pacific coast of Mexico in 5 Jalisco and adj. Colima (long. 103°45"— 104°45'W). — Not mapped, — FL.
VI-XL
A taxon starts here.
48.
Zygia latifolia (Linnaeus) Fawcett & Rendle, Fl. Jamaica 4: 150.
1920. — Typus infra sub var. fatiSofia indicatur.
Macrophyllidious, cauliflorous, arborescent shrubs and slender some precociously flowering at 2-4 but mostly 4-15 m, exceptionally attaining 20 m, with trunk exceptionally to 3 dm dbh, the defoliate branches pallid smooth, the young stems and lf-axes either glabrous or thinly to densely grayor sordidpilosulous with hairs <0.6 mm, the ample papery Ifts glabrous except for sometimes puberulent nerves of hypophyllum, the inflorescence composed of either sessile or shortly pedunculate capitula or short (but sometimes loose) spikes of either white, ochroleucous of pink, commonly pink-, rarely white-stamened fls, each unit of inflorescence arising singly from defoliate knots of trunk, branches, or both, well below current foliage, never assembled into pseudoracemes, but sometimes fasciculate.
Stipules triangular-ovate, deltate, or lanceolate, 1-8(—10) mm, either deciduous or persistent through one season (exceptionally longer), in texture either thickened and externally nerveless, or thinner and prominently striate, when persistent sometimes becoming papery and blanched, in many specimens forming a loose tuft of scales at tip of current year's branchlets, Lf-formula if4-3% (4%), the Ifts most commonly either 3-5 or exactly 3 or 5 per pinna, the odd posterior one usually very small and sometimes lacking: petioles x 1.4-3 mm, bearing at tip a sessile, subcircular or obtusely thombic, plane or shallowly cupular nectary (0.8-)1- 3.2 mm diam; rachis of pinnae 2.5-13 cm, the further interpinnal segments 1.5-8 cm, the first lft(s) usually <1 cm distant from pinna-pulvinus; pulvinule of Ifts 2-5 mm; lits accrescent distally, often strongly so, the blades narrowly to broadly elliptic or ovate-elliptic from inequilaterally cuneate base, shortly, bluntly or subacutely acuminate, the distal pair (4-)4.5—18(-20) x em, mostly 2-3.3 (rarely -4.2) times as long as wide; venation asymmetrically pinnate, the proximal secondary nerves on posterior side of midnb, usually in all Ifts but always in the distal pair of Lfts, at once longer and stronger than the rest, one or more of them produced well beyond midblade, the tertiary venulation weak.
Peduncles mostly 0-3 mm, rarely to 12-20 mm; fils (3-)5-25, the receptacle commonly 1-4,5(—5,5) mm, rarely in Atlantic SE Brazil to 9.5 mm; bracts triangular acute 0.4-1.1 mm, persistent; perianth commonly strigulose on calyx-teeth and corolla-lobes but otherwise glabrous, sometimes glabrous except for microscapically ciliolate calyx or corolla-lobes, but in var. pus puberulent or hispidulous overall with erect, ascending, or subappressed hairs <0.4 mm; calyx shallowly to deeply campanulate (0.3-)0.4—2.5(-3.3) x 1-1.3 mm, the tube striate, sometimes oblique at orifice, the low-deltate, sometimes scarcely perceptible teeth 0.1-0.6 mm; corolla either pink or white, commonly 4.5-8 mm, exceptionally only 3.5 mm or attaining 9(-10) mum, the striately nerved tube subcylindric to distally dilated, near orifice 0.7-2.6 mm diam, the ovate nerveless lobes ascending; androecium (18-)20— 38(—40)-meraus, 14-30 mm, the usually white ube 6.5—-14 mm, exserted !—7 mm, the tasse] rarely white also, usually pink or crimson distally; intrastaminal disc 0.30.7 mm; ovary at anthesis either glabrous or puberulent, Pods subsessile, linear or broad-linear in profile, straight or more often gently decurved, when well fertilized (6-)8-18 cm long, (0.830.9-33 mm wide, +8-14-seeded, at first planocompressed but becoming low-biconvex when distended by ripe seeds, the valves leathery, without pithy-ligneous mesocarp and <1 mm thick in section, densely minutely tomentulose overall to glabrescent (but always puberulent at least near the base, or along the sutures, or both), the sutures straight or very shallowly pinched between seeds; dehiscence of the genus; seeds uniseriate, contiguous or spaced along the cavity but not imbricate or mutually distorted, in broad profile round or bluntly thombic, (8-)9-15(-18) mm diam, plump!y discoid, the papery testa dull brown, pleurogram 0.
The concept of Z. latifolia implicit in the foregoing description is materially wider than any proposed hitherto.
It embraces not only the original Jamaican Pitheceliobium tatifolium but also P. glabranun Martius and F fastopus, which Bentham (1876) interpreted as glabrate and pubescent phases of P caultflorum, but also the historic nucleus of the latter, and the forms segregated as P. sanguineum Bentham, P. stipulare Bentham, and P. Aubert Ducke.
The material now available for comparative study shows that the supposed discontinuities among these taxa were illusory, reflections of a randomly assembled sampling.
As redefined here, Z. fatifolia is characterized by emphatically inequilateral secondary venation of the leaflets combined with pods of stiffly chartaceous or leathery, but not pithy-ligneous texture.
Zygia cataractae, which has or can have essentially similar fruits, differs principally in equilaterally pinnate secondary venation of leaflets.
The closely related Z. inaequalis has an often (but neither absolutely nor consistently) larger calyx coinciding with relatively numerous leaflets and less inequilateral venation, but it can be most surely separated by the tough, rigid valves of the pad, Zygia latifolia, cataractae, and inaequalis ae widely sympatric, are adapted to similar riparian habitats, and have very similar flowers, specimens of ambiguous identity are not rare in herbaria, and it is suspected that some of these may be of hybrid origin.
Characters employed in the past to define segregates of Z. latifolia are: (a) pubescence, especially of leaf-axes and perianth; (b) texmre and persistence of stipules; number of leaflets per pinna; (d) size of leaflets; (e) extension or contraction of the peduncle and the floral axis of inflorescence-units; (f) absolute and relative lengths of calyx and corolla; and (g) length and consequent exsertion of the androecial tube.
Repeated attempts to sort the herbarium materjal into categories compatible with plausible dispersal pattems have met with smal] success.
The lack of discontinuities in the variation of each character and the independent variation of most have led ineluctably to the comprehensive notion of Z. latifolia adopted here.
A taxon starts here.
48a.
Zygia latifolia var. communis Barneby & Grimes, var. nov., a var. latifolia legumine angusto (8+)9-19.5 (nec 20-30) mm lato necnon distributione amplissima austro-americana, ab aliis speciei formis aut coroliae tubo glaberrimo aut foliolis utriusque pinnae exacte 3 vel 5 diversa. — Brazil.
Roraima: Mun. de Boa Vista, Reserva Ecolégica de Marac4, +3°30'N, 61°42'W, 25 Apr 1987 G. P. Lewis 1562. — Holotypus, K; isotypus, NY.
As described for the species, with these limitations: Ifts 3-5 per pinna; corolla-tube glabrous; pod <19,5 mm wide.
In seasonally flooded lowland forest, on swampy, near the coast brackish, shores, and pendulous from stream banks, in gallery forest ascending locally to 600 m, common and widespread over South America N and W of the Amazon and Madeira rivers, in Brazil SE into extreme N Goids, and S through Acre into NE Bolivia, — Map 35, where probable but inherently ambiguous records based on sterile or flowering material with relatively ample Ifts suggestive of var. latifolia are differentiated by a distinctive symbol. — Fl. almost throughout the year, perhaps most profusely during the flood season.
In transferring P. stipudare to Zygia, Rico (1991) stated that Bentham considered it synonymous with P. cauliflorum, but this is incorrect.
In reality, Bentham recognized P cauliflorum as an independent species and equated P. stipulare only with plants that he had previously mistaken (Bentham, 1844: 414) for P. caulifiorum.
Rica considered Z. stipularis different from Z caudiflora in persistent stipules and more numerous ("up to 5 pairs') leaflets per pinna.
She failed to notice the discrepancy between this definition and the protologue of P stipulare, in which Bentham described the leaflets as "/—2-jug .
.
. addito saepius inferiore a number confirmed in Flora brasiliensis ("foliolis 3-5"), and moreover she passed over without comment Bentham's record of P. stipufare from Guyana.
A taxon starts here.
48b.
Zygia latifolia var. latifolia.
Z. latifolia (L.) Fawcett & Rendle, 1920: 1. fig. 46, sens. str. Mimosa latifolia Linnaeus, Sp. Pl, ed. 2, 1499.
1763. — Habitat in — Based on Acacia non spinosa juglandis folio, flore purpurascente Plumier, Cat. Pl. Amer. 17.
1703 & ex J. Burman, Fl. Amer. 1: 5, t. IX (Mimosa inermis, folits 1755. — Holotypus, the copy (not verified) at Groningen University of an original drawing at P (Bibliotéque Centrale)!, — Inga latifolia (Linnaeus) Wilidenow, Sp. Pl. 4: 1020.
1806. — Pishecolobium latifolium (Linnaeus) Bentham, London J. Bot. 3: 214, 1844. — Calliandra latifolia (Linnaeus) Grisebach, Fl. Brit.
W. Ind. 225.
1864. — Feuilleea latifolia (Linnaeus) O. Kuntze, Revis.
Gen. PL. 1: 188.
1891.
As described for the species, and differing consistently from more widely dispersed var. communis only in pod at least 1.7 cm, usually 2 cm wide or wider; Ifts broadly ovate to lance-elliptic, but never more than 5 per pinna. in moist or flooded woodland, entering the margin of mangrove swamps and ascending inland to +400 m, discontinously dispersed in lat. 20°N-2°S; SE Mexico (Tabasco); around the Caribbean basin on the Greater Antilles (E Cuba, E Jamaica, SW Haiti), Lesser Antilles (S from Martinique), E Panama and adj. Colombia, Trinidad, thence in South America, along and near the coast, from the Orinoco delta through the Guianas to the Amazon delta and N Maranhio, — Map 36. — Flowering nearly throughout the year. — Hoopwood; horsewood (Jamaica); cacolay (Grenada); maya-maya (Honduras).
We have found sothing of substance to distinguish subsp. 'ayronense, either in the protologue or in the holotype.
The larger leaflets of the latter are about 13 cm long, and its pod is 17 x 2,8 cm, well within che limits of variation recorded for Z. latifolia var. latifolia.
A taxon starts here.
48c. Zygia latifolia var. lasiopus (Bentham) Barneby & Grimes, comb. et stat. nov. Pithecolobium tasiopus Bentham, London J. Bot. 2: 141.
1840. — "British Guiana.
Schomburgk, n.
487."
— Holotypus, K!; isotypus, OXFI.
Lfts either 3 or 5 per pinna, the distal pair of larger lvs x cm; calyx hemispherical or campanulate 0.4—-1.7(-2) mm long; corolla 5-7(-8) mm, the tbe as well as the lobes hirtellous or ascending-pilosulous; pod when well fertilized (7—)9—16(-17) x 1.2-1.6 cm.
In seasonally flooded forest, on riverbanks, and in the understory of gallery woodland, below 200 m, common and locally abundant in both coastal and interior Guyana, Surinam, French Guiana, and lower Amazonian Brazil, extending with less frequency into Venezuelan Guayana, and SW to the NW corner of Mato Grosso and SW state of Amazonas, Brazil; once recorded from E Peru (lower Ucayali valley). — Map 37. — Flowering intermittently throughout the year.
Indifferent specimens from the Federal District in Brazil (Rfo Preto, Heringer 9278, NY, in young flower) are technically referable to var. lasiopus by leaf-formula and puberulent corolla.
Only var. glabrata could logically be expected near the latitude of Brasilia.
The record is omitted from the map and determination deferred until the plant is better known.
A taxon starts here.
48d.
Zygia latifolia var. controversa Barneby & Grimes, var. nov., a var. commumi foliolis pinnaram majorum 5-9 (nec exacte 3 vel 5) stipulisque pletisque striato-nervosis vix diversa, — BRAZIL.
Rondénia: margem direita do rio Pacaés Novos entre a 142# cachoeira, 20 Mar 1978 (fr.), Ubiratan Santos, F Ramos, & C. D. Mota 212. — Holotypus, NY.
Stipules lance-triangular 2.5-8 mm, subpersistent at distal nodes; lits of longer pinnae 5-9 (>5 in some pinnae of a plant), the blades elliptic, ovate-elliptic, or elliptic-oblanceolate, the longest 6-11 x 2.54 (4.5) cm; axis of capitula (-3.5 mm, calyx 1-2.8 mm; corolla 5.3-8 mm, the tube glabrous; pod of var. communis, mm wide.
In habitats of var. communis, especially in gallery forest and on seasonally inundated floodplains, reportedly also on lowland terra firme, below 250 m, localized in SW Amazonia on the upper forks of the Purtis and Madeira Rivers in Acre and adj. Amazonas and Rondénia, Brazil, and in subcontiguous Pando and Beni, Bolivia; cultivated at Belém, Pard. —- Map 37, — FI.
VII-IX(-XII). — Hediondilla (Beni).
A taxon starts here.
48e. Zygia latifolia var. glabrata (Martius) Bameby & Grimes, comb. et stat. nav.
Pithecollobiwn (7) glabratum Martius, Flora 20(2, Beibl.
8 (Herb, fl. bras.)): 116.
1837, —".
.
. ad fluvium Doce [Espirito Santo, Brazil]: fl. no collector mentioned. — Type not identified, but a specimen collected in Apri 1816 by Maximilian zu Wied, GOET! is seemingly authentic. — Equated by Bentham (1875: 596) with Pithecolobiwn cauliflorum ('fma ? Mimosa glamerata Vellozo, Fl, Flum.
11: t, 113.
1829; Arch, Mus. Nac. Rio de Janeiro 5: 440.
1881. — "Habitat silvis regii Pred.
Sanctae Crucis [near Rio de Janeiro].' — As no specimen survives, the crude illustration becomes the type. — No other cauliflorous mimosoid occurs close to Rio de Janeiro, but the 4-5 Ifts per pinna shown in Vellozo's plate are atypical of var. glabrata.
The description, however, calls for 6-jugate Ifts and petioles lacking nectary, introducing further difficulty in interpretation.
Fortunately .there is a prior Z. glomerata (de Candolle) Pittier.
Stipules mm, subpersistent, externally nerveless except when young; 5-11 per pinna, >5 in some longer ones, the blades elliptic or oblanceelliptic 4-10(-12) x 1.5-4(-5) cm; axis of longer spikes (3-)4-11 mm; calyx (0.5-)0.8-2.8 mm; corollz 5-7.5 mm, the tube glabrous; pod (little known) 47-12 x 1,3-1.7 cm.
In riparian woodiand at low elevations, best knows from the Atlantic forest between centr. Bahia and E Rio de Janeiro, once recorded from Pernambuco anc seldom from interior E Minas Gerais; apparently dis junct along the Parand River from E Paraguay anc adj. Parané in Brazil upstream to Jtuiutaba in the Triangulo Mineiro. — Map 37. — Fl. VI-X.
A taxon starts here.
49, Zygia garcia-barrigae (Barbosa) Bameby & Grimes, comb. et stat. nov. Pithecellobium latifolium subsp. garcia-barrigae Barbosa, Caldasia 14(68-70): 397.
1986. — "COLOMBIA, Cundinamarca, La Vega, camino a Nocaima..
.
27 Ene 1942, H. GarctaB, — Holotypus, COL!; isotypus, "US," not available for study in the course of this revision.
Pithecellobium tatifolium subsp. garcia-barrigae sensu Barbosa, 1991: 319.
Macrophyllidious trees +4 m, with stout terete gray branches, except for minutely brownish-puberulent inflorescence and fruit glabrous throughout, the ample, thinly chartaceous Ifts dull brown-olivaceous above, paler dull beneath, the capituliform units of inflorescence arising singly from knots either axillary to mature hornotinous lvs or at nodes of defoliate branches, the fruits cauline.
Stipules broadly lanceelliptic acute, the larger ones attaining 14-20 x 7-8 mm, dorsally, becoming papery pallid, fragile and tattered but not disarticulating.
Lf-formula if5; petiole +10 x 4 mm, charged at apex with an (imperfectly observed) nectary; rachis of pinnae to 12cm and probably longer, charged ventrally between each pair of Ifts with a sessile disciform nectary 2.5 mm diam, the interfoliolar segments to cm; Iftpulvinules +6-8 x 2.5-3 mm, deeply fissured transversally when dry; lfts accrescent distally, the blades obovate-elliptic from inequilaterally cuneate base, shortly acuminate, those of distal pair attaining 17 x 6.5 cm (probably more); midrib subcentric, almost straight, pinnately +6-7-branched on each side, the first posterior secondary nerve shorter than the second one, this incurved-ascending to or somewhat beyond midblade, these all sharply prominulous on lower face of blade, the tertiary and reticular venules progressively fainter.
Peduncles 15-17 mm; capitula +5-10-fld, the receptacle in fruit 2-3.5 mm; bracts ovate acute +1 mm persistent, fls (1 seen, dry, incomplete) sessile, the perianth 4-merous, the corolla obtusely striate, the calyx faintly 4-nerved, both minutely puberulent overall; calyx campanulate +2 x 1.5 mm, the teeth 0.3 mm (one sinus more deeply split in age); corolla +6.5 mm, the lobes +2 mm; androecium ("34"-merous, ex char.) and gynoecium not seen, Pods in broad view subundulately linear 7.5—8.5 x 1-1.1 cm, nearly straight, 9-10-seeded, when ripe turgidly biconvex, the stiffly coriaceous valves composed of black exocarp 20.6 mm and pallid crustaceous endocarp +0.15 mm thick in section, faintly tugulose, brown-gold-puberulent overall; dehiscence not seen; seeds plumply discoid, in broad view 8.5 x 7.5 mm, the papery, dull brown testa wrinkled, narrowly winged peripherally, lacking pleurogram.
In unrecorded habitat but to be expected in riparian woodland, known oniy from the type, between 950 and 1200 m on the W slope of Cordillera Oriental, near 74°21'°W, in Cundinamarca, Colombia. — Not mapped. — In ripe fr. late I. Except for weaker and shorter posterior vein of leaflets, the foliage of Z. garcia-barrigae certainly resembies that of Z. datifolia.
The syndrome of dilated papery stipules, unique in the genus, narrow cumid pod, relatively small seeds, and submontane Andean habitat is so different as to entitle subsp. garciabarrigae to specific status.
A taxon starts here.
50.
Zygia selloi (Bentham) L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46: 505.
1991.
Pithecolobium sellot Bentham, London J. Bot. 3: 212.
1844. — "Brasil, Selo."
— Helorypus, Kt; isotypi, Selle 6005/941, B = F Neg. 12781, Sello Macrophyllous arborescent shrub or tree ("arvore of unknown stature, glabrous throughout, with smooth terete branches, stiffly papery bicolored Ifts, and spikes of relatively large fis arising in small fascicles from knots on defoliate branches.
Stipules ovate 1-1.5 mm, caducous.
Lf-formula if24, each pinna (4-)5-foliolate; lf-stks including fuscous pulvinus 5-8 x 1.3-2.5 mm; nectary at top of lf-stks plane +1.5—-2 mm diam; rachis of longer pinnae 5-11 cm, the further interfolioiar segment (2-)2.5-5,5 cm; lftpulvinules 2.5-4 mm; lfts distally accrescent, the blades elliptic or broad-elliptic from inequilaterally cuneate base, shortly acuminate, the larger ones +8.5—14(-15.5) x 3.5-6.5 cm, 2.2-3 times as long as wide; venation finely prominulous only on dorsal face, the subcentric, gently incurved midrib giving tise on each side to 5-7 major incurved-ascending secondary nerves, the tertiary venulation weak and open, Pedunctes +1-3 cm; spikes +10-40-fld, the floral axis attaining 1.3-9 cm; bracts minute persistent; perianth glabrous, pink; calyx campanulate, sometimes deeply so, 1.8-5.8 mm, teeth often unequal, ovate or depressed-deltate mm; corolla 11-14 mm, the ovate or lanceolate lobes 1.6-3 mm; androecium +54-merous (one cound), 13-2) mm, the stemonozone +0.7 mm, the tassel of unknown color, the intrastaminal disc 20.8 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous.
Pods not seen, described by Bentham (1875) as shortly stipitate, 215 x 2.5 em, the coriaceous valves minutely puberuient, In unrecorded habitat but to be expected along streams in woodland, collected first by Sello at a locality not recorded, in late 1826 by Burchell near Santos, state of So Paulo, in 1931 by A. Gehrt (no. 28064) on Ilha Sto Amaro, Siio Paulo, and in 1950, by A. B. Joly (no. 7275), again in SGo Paulo near Vila Atlantica, to be sought in remnant Atlantic Forest elsewhere in S40 Paulo and perhaps Parana. — Not mapped. — Fl. XII, V. Zygia seltoi has much in common with Z. longifoJia, but has notably larger flowers and a remotely disjunct range.
The type of P. sanguinteum differs from that of Z, selloi in a deeply campanulate calyx (to +5.5, not 2-2.5 mm long) but is not otherwise different, so far as known, The epithet sangtaneum refers to the color of the flush leaves, not to the corolla.
A taxon starts here.
Zygia biflora L. Rico, Kew Bull. 49: 553, fig. 2 (F-L).
1994. — "GUATEMALA.
Tf.
Ortiz 2463...
Department of Izabal, between Puerto Méndez and Cienaga, 18 March — Holotypus, BM n.v.; isotypi, F!, LL (not available in 1994); paratypi, Contreras 11472, NY1, TEX!.
Macrophyllous srees attaining 10-12 m with trunk 2 dm diam and pallid terete branchlets of the genus, glabrous except for minutely brown-puberulent young and inflorescence, the papery bifoliolate lvs bicolored, dull brown-olivaceous above, paler beneath, the fls arising singly on short bibracteate peduncles from knots on annotinous and older branches below the current season's foliage.
Stipules narrowly trianguiar t1-1.5 mm, deciduous.
Lf-formula each pinna 1-foliolate; lf-stks including livid pulvinus 3-8.5 mm, at middle 0.6-0.8 mm diam; nectary at tip of petiole (few seen) subsessile, cupular 20.5—1 mm diam; rachis of pinnae 3.5-9 mm; lft-pulvinules 2-2.4(-4) mm, scarcely wrinkled; lfts appearing terminal but in reality posterior and lateral to a small terminal appendage of the rachis, the blade ovate-acuminate from either subsymmetrically or inequilaterally broad-cuneate base, 7-12.5 x 2.5-5 cm, 2.3-2.8 times as long as wide, the margin closely conspicuously undulate; venation shallowly impressed on upper face of blade, sharply prominulous beneath, the subcentric midrib forwardly incurved, the major, incurved-ascending secondary nerves 5 on each side, the connecting and reticular venules weak.
Peduncles solitary or paired at a node, 1.5—3 mm; bracts 2 navicular obtuse, scarcely 1 mm, persistent; flowers solitary, sessile, the perianth and androecium white, the corolla minutely puberulent under magnification; calyx narrowly campanulate i4 x 1 mm, the teeth at most 0.4 mm; corolla tubular 10.5 mm, the ovate iobes 0.8 mm; androscium +16 mm, 50-60-merous, the tube +7.5 mm, not quite as long as the corolla; intrastaminal nectary 0.4 mm; ovary subsessile, glabrous.
Pods not known.
In high forest on hilltop, near 200 m, known only from the type locality and from El Estor in dept.
Izabal, Guatemala. — Not mapped. — FI.
III. 'The relatively small, marginally crimped leaflets of Z. biflora recall Z. conzattii, but the leaf-formula is that of Z. unifoliolata.
The solitary flowers are unique in the genus.
A taxon starts here.
52.
Zygia bisingula L. Rico, Kew Bull. 49: 551, fig. 3 A-H. 1994. — VENEZUELA, Portuguesa, G. Aymard, F, Ortega and Desantiago 4445 ,.
.
20km E. of Biscucuy, 16 Mar — Holotypus, PORT n.v.; isotypus, MO (not available in 1993); paratypi, Ortega & R. F Smith 2561, Marcano Berti 930-034, NY!.
Unarmed, macrophyllidious, caulifforous trees 5-8(—?) m tall with terete pallid annotinous and older branchlets, glabrous throughout, the papery leaflets olivaceous subconcolorous, the loosely few-fld spikes or racemes of fls arising singly or 2-3 together from knotty brachyblasts far below the foliage.
Supules apparently 0, Lfformuda lf-stks including discolored but scarcely wrinkled pulvinus 2.5-4.5 cm, at middle +1.5 mm diam; a sessile shallow-cupular thick-rimmed nectary t.2—1.5 mm diam at tip of petiole; pinnae pair, the rachis of each 2-3.5 cm; leaflet of each pinna 1, its pulvinule 3-4 mm, the blade amply ovateor oblong-elliptic from broadly cuneate or rounded base, shortly bluntly acuminate, +17—22 x 65-10 cm; venation pinnate, the straight centric midrib prominulous on both faces, giving rise on each side to 5-7 major and random intercalary secondary nerves incurved-ascending to anastomosis shortly within the plane margin and to a close reticulum of venules finely raised on each face.
Spikes loosely the peduncle and rachis together 3.5-7 cm; bracts ovate 0.3-0.5 mm, subpersistent; calyx shallowly campanulate 1.5-1.9 x 1.6 mm, either sessile or contracted at base into a pedicel to 0.9 mm, the depressed-deltate teeth +0.1 mm; coroila reddish, narrowly trumpet-shaped 10-11 mm, +18-nerved, the ascending or connivent, triangular-ovate lobes 2-3 x 1-1.7 mm; androecium 72-80-merous, white, 28-30 mm, the mbe 11-12 mm, the stemonozone L.4-1.6 mm; ovary narrowly oblong, obscurely stipitate, glabrous, surrounded at base by a cupular nectarial disc +0.6 mm tall.
Pods subsessile, in profile linear, straight or gently falcate, +30 x 2.3-2.5 cm, attenuate at base and abruptly apiculate, strongly compressed and only slightly convex over the 12-15 seeds, the sutures not dilated, the stiffly leathery fibrous valves externally fuscousor purplish-castaneous, lowpapillate and evenulose, the cavity continuous, the endocarp gray-tan within but the shallow seed-cups brown-resinous; seeds well separated along the cavity, not seen ripe.
In the understory of moist evergreen forest at 1200-1600 m, apparently localized on the E slope of Cordillera de Mérida in W-centr. Venezuela, astride the Trujillo-Portuguesa state line in lat. 9°11/-18'N. — Not mapped. — FI.
I-IV. Zygia bisingula differs from Z. unifoliolata by elongate primary and secondary leaf-axes, by the larger leaflet-blades, by spicate (rather than capitufate) units of inflorescence, and by the extremely long, nearly straight pod of tough texture.
The leaf by itself, which takes the form of a Y bearing an ample blade at top of each arm, is unmistakable.
Two early collections, nevertheless, have been assigned in annotation, by a student of Mimosaceae, to (when sterile) and to Senna (when in fruit)—that is, to genera that have, by definition, simply pinnate, not bipinnate, leaves,
A taxon starts here.
53.
Zygia unifoliolata (Bentham) Pittier, 3rd Conf.
Interam.
Agric.
Caracas [Cat. Fl. Venez.
1:]: 359.
1945.
Pithecolobiun unifotiolanwn Bentham, London J. Bot. 3: 212, 1844. — "Brazil, [L. Riedel] commun. —- Holotypus, labeled "Inga 2, Rio Madeira, Riedel ex herb.
Mus. Petrop., K (hb. Bentham.)! = NY Neg. 2024. — Feuilleea unifotiolata O. Kuntze, Revis.
Gen. Pl. 1: 189.
1891.
Pithecellobium unifotiolatum sensu Barbosa, 1991: 303, fig. 9.
Macrophyllidious cauliflorous shrubs and slender treelets 2-8 m, with pallid annotinous and older branches, either glabrous throughout or the new branchlets and the lfand inflorescence-axes minutely puberulent, the chartaceous lfts dull olivaceous, paler beneath, the few-fld capitula of usually fragrant, whitish or pinkish fls nearly always fasciculate at defoliate nodes but exceptionally pseudoracemose on an incipient primary axis <1 cm.
Stipules fugacious or perhaps in some plants lacking, those subtending new ivs deltate-triangular 0.3-0.4 mm, faintly 1-nerved.
Lf-formula 1/4, each If bifoliolate, petiole 1.5-6(-10) x 0.9-2.3(-2.6) mm, charged at tip with a sessile, round, almost plane and button-shaped or shallowly cupular thick-rimmed nectary 0.7-1.9 (2.5) mm diam, a similar but smaller nectary sometimes at tip of each pinna-rachis but this often lacking; pinna-rachises (1-)].5-5(-6) mm, pulvinule of Ifts 0.8-3.5 mm; Lft-blades narrowly or broadly elliptic, ovate-elliptic or linear-elliptic from inequilaterally cuneate base, usually shortly or obscurely, exceptionally attenvately acuminate, the larger ones 6-16 (19.5) x cm, or in SW Venezuela (Aymard 9078, NY) 20-27 x 7-8 cm, 1.8—3.8(-4.6) times as long as wide; venation pinnate, the subcentric, straight or slightly incurved midrib giving rise on each side to 6-12 major incurved-ascending (and indefinite intercalary) secondary nerves brochidodrome well within the plane margin, these and tertiary venulation and sometimes a reticulum of veinlets scarcely or not raised on upper face, more sharply defined beneath.
Peduncles very slender 1.5—-10(-13) mm; capitula 5-16-fld, the receptacle usually globose or plumply ellipsoid 0.7-2 mm, exceptionally to 4 mm long; bracts avate acute 0.3-0.6 mm, persistent; perianth glabrous except for microscopically ciliolate orifice of and rarely apically puberulent corolla, the corolla tube +15-striate, the labes nerveless; calyx cupularpatelliform 0.25-0,6 x 0.6-0.8 mm or rarely more deeply campanulate +1 x 1 mm, the teeth always minute; corolla ochreleucous or pinkishto yellowishgreen, subtubular or distally dilate 5.3-7.3 mm, the erect ovate lobes 0.6-1.3 mm; androecium 20-36- merous, 17.5-24 mm, the tube (7-)9-13.5 mm, exserted (1-)2.5—7.5 mm, the tassel white or ochroleucous; intrastaminal disc 0.2-0.45 mm, sometimes obsolescent; ovary 1,2-1.8 mm, contracted at base into a stipe as long as the disc and rather abruptly at apex into the style, glabrous; stigma poriform 20.15 mm diam. Pods solitary, sessile or almost so, in profile broad-linear retrofalcate or annular and often randomly twisted, when well fertilized 9-19.5 x 1.4-2.8 cm, planocompressed becoming low convex over each seed, the coriaceous, green but brunnescent, glabrous valves framed by scarcely or undulately constricted sutural keels 1 mm wide or less; dehiscence of the genus; seeds (scarcely known) transverse, plumply disciform mm diam. On riverbanks, in gallery woodland, and in forest subject to annual flooding, locally gregarious from sea level to 240 m, scattered over the Orinoco and Amazon basins between 9°N and 10°S latitude in Venezuela (Apure to Anzodtegui), E Colombia (W to Sa. de Ja Macarena), NE Peru (Loreto), Brazil (Amazonas to centr. Pari) and extreme NE Bolivia (Pando), seemingly isolated in centr. Panama and lowland Caribbean Costa Rica, and once recorded from N Chiapas, Mexico (mun, Ocosingo, Martinez 10932, NY). — Map 38. — FI. throughout the year, most prolifically in X-II]. — Yacushimbitle (Peru); guamita CYenezuela), Like Z. latifolia, this species varies greatly in size of leaflets and width of pods, but we find no consistent geographic segregation.
An extreme form from state of Amazonas, Venezuela (Aymard 9078, NY), is remarkable for acuminately caudate leaflets attaining 20-27 x 7-8 cm and for pods to 2.8 cm wide, not matched elsewhere in the species.
This variant was seen by the collector as a vine, rather than a bushy shrub, and may perhaps tum out, when the flowers are known, to deserve some taxonomic status.
A taxon starts here.
54.
Zygia pithecolobloides (O. Kuntze) Bameby & Grimes, comb. nov. Feuilleea pithecolobioides O. Kuntze, Revis.
Gen. Pl. 3(2): 64.
1898. — "Concepcion de — Holotypus, Kuntze, s.n., collected at Concepcidn in September, 1892, NY (hb. Kuntze., 2 sheets)!; isotypus, 1B. — Inga (7) pithecolobioides Harms ex QO, Kuntze, 1898, J.c., in syn. — Pithecolobium pithecolobioides vat. harmsii Hassler, Feddes Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 8: 557.
1910, nom. superfl. — Pithecolobium pithecelabioides (O. Kuntze) Hassler ex L, Rico, Kew Bull. 46: 505.
1991, in syn., typified by 718Ga, as though a transferred epithet required a new typus.
Macrophyllidions, subdeciduons, arborescent shrubs 2-6 (fide Kunth, to 12) m with pallid, stiffly flexuous branches and difoliolate lvs, the young stems, lf-stks and peduncles softly sordid-pilosulous, the mature foliage glabrous except for sometimes puberulent midtib of epiphyllum, the chartaceous Ifts dull brownolivaceous when dry, a little paler beneath, the capitula of white, pinkor purple-stamened fils arising singly from terminal branchlets associated with coeval lvs.
Stipules deltate 0.5-1.8 mm, becoming indurated, persistent.
Lf-formula if'; petiole including discolored but otherwise undifferentiated pulvinus 1.54 mm: nectary at tip of petiole sessile, almost plane, round 0.5-0.9 mm diam, no nectary on pinnae, pinna-rachis including pulvinus 0.5-1.5(-"4") mm; Ift-blades obovate or elliptic-obovate from inequilaterally obtuse base, the larger ones 2,5-6(—"8.5") x cm; venation pinnate, the straight subcentric midrib giving rise on each side to +57 incurved-ascending and brochidodromous secondary nerves and these to tertiary venules weakly prominulous on both faces.
Pedunctes solitary 6—-]1(-'20") mm; capitula the fis sessile, the receptacle +2 mm; bracts +0.5 mm, persistent; perianth glabrous except for minutely puberulent orifice of calyx and tip of corolla-lobes, the calyx indistinctly 5-nerved, the corolla-tube weakly striate; calyx campanulate +1.3-1.6(—"3") mm, the teeth 0.15-0.4 mm; corolla slightly enlarged upward 7-8.5(-"10") mm, the lobes +2 mm; androecium 30-42-merous, ("13"-)19-23 mm, the tube 9-11 mm, exserted +2 mm; nectarial disc mm; ovary glabrous.
Fods sessile, in profile lunately oblong 4-5.7 x 1.3-2(-"3") cm, obtuse at apex, at base semicordately produced backward from pedicel, +8-seeded, the sutures not dilated, the ripe valves dry, crustaceous, glabrous; fully formed seeds not seen, In brush-woodland subject to flooding in the wet season, below 250 m, endemic to the middle Paraguai valley in lat. 20°-28°S, from Mato Grosso do Sul Miranda) in Brazil S through centr. Paraguay to extreme N Argentina (E Chaco and northemmost Corientes), — Map 38. — FI.
V, IX, the full season not established. — Granadillo de rfo (Corrientes).
A taxon starts here.
55.
Zygia codonocalyx Barneby & Grimes, sp. nov., petiolis elongatis 4-5 cm longis, foliorum pinna utraque 9-foliolata, floribus dissitissime spicatis, et praesertim calyce maximo 1).5-12 x 7.5-10 mm long saltem coroliae dimidiae aquilongo praestans, A Z. obolingoide, specie una quoad perianthium comparabili, spicis elongatis statim distinguitur. — COLOMBIA, Antioquia, mun. Troncal de) Caribe entre El 2 y E] 7, garrocha El 7, bosques a la margen derecha del rfo Cauca (7°30'N, 75°20'W), elev.
120 m, 8 nov 1987 (f1.), R. Caillejas (with F J. Roldin, A, Arbeldez & D. L. Echeverry) 5452, — Holotypus, HUA 57714!; isotypi, K!, NY! Macrophyllous, cauliflorous treelet +4 m, the homotingus foliate (barren) branchlets, like all axes of lvs and inflorescence, densely pilosulous with msty or sordid hairs <0.3 mm, the ample, thin-textured Ifts dull dark green (when dry chocolate-brown) above, a litde paler beneath, thinly pilosulous only along veins, the loosely spiciform, many-fld inlforescences arising from knots on the trunk, described as yellow when live.
Stipules (few seen) lanceolate deciduous; axillary buds of linear-lanceolate, distally recurved scales +7 mm.
Lfformua the leaflets 18 per If; lf-stks including pulvinus 4-5 cm, terete, +2.5-3 mm diam, charged at tip with a low-mounded nectary; similar but smaller nectaries between each lIft-pair; rachis of each pinna +2.5—-3 dm, the longer interfoliolar segments 4,5-7.5 cm; pulvinules 4.5-7 x 1.1-1.5 mm Ifts elliptic from subsymmetrically cuneate base, +15-25 x 3.5-6 cm, distally tapering into a subcaudate, sharply acute tip; costa and secondary veins shallowly engraved on upper face of blade, slenderly prominulous dorsally, the centric midrib straight, the incurved-ascending secondary nerves 4-5 from each side of costa, the first posterior (subbasal) one produced well beyond midblade, the connecting secondary and tertiary venules subhorizontal-scalariform.
Axis of inflorescence simple, apparently spreading from trunk, including peduncle +2-3 dm, the fls disposed in irreguiar whorls of 3-5 spaced +5-7 mm apart at maturity, the fl-buds more crowded, subcontiguous; bracts deflexed, narrowly ovate-triangular 0.8-1 mm, deciduous; fis essentially sessile, the perianth densely brown-tomentulose externally, the fl-buds plumply ovoid-ellipsoid, the calyx-lobes valvately coherent until shortly before anthesis, separating irregularly; calyx at full anthesis campanulate 11.5-12 x 75-10 mm, the sinuses between the ovate acute lobes 3-7.5 mm deep; corolla trumpet-shaped +14-15 mm, cleft into erect-ascending ovate lobes 4— as long as tube; androecium (of functionally male fls) +370- merous and 35 mm long, the stemonozone 2-3.5 mm, the mbe 11-12 mm, the filaments several-ranked, many outer ones sterile; anthers +0.3 mm wide; lobed intrastaminal disc 0.3 mm; pistillate or hermaphroditi fls and fr unknown, In riparian woodland, 120 m, known only from th lower Cauca valley, at 7°30'N in mun. Tarazé, An tisquia, Colombia. ——- Not mapped. — Fl.
A taxon starts here.
56.
Zygia obolingoides L. Rico, Kew Bull. 46: 502, fig 3.
1991. — "Bolivia, Krukoff 10798 .
.
.
Depto La Paz, Prov. of Larecaja, Turi [properly Tuiri] .
.
. on left bank of Rio Mapiri [+15°20°S, — Holotypus, NY (f1.)!; isotypus, F (said to have fruit, but not presently available for study).
Amply foliate, cauliflorous, arborescent shrubs 45-6 m, glabrous except for sordid-puberulent fls, the thinly chartaceous lits olivaceous above, paler yellowish-olivaceous beneath, the relatively large reddish fls densely congested on a short, sessile, thickened axis arising directly from knots on annctinous and older wood, each cluster +4 cm diam. Stipules unknown, Lf-formula i/3%, the lfts !4 per Jf; petioles terete, together with wrinkled pulvinus 9-17 x 3-48 mm; nectary at tp of petiole sessile or sunken, shallowly cupular 2.5 mm diam, a smaller, round or rhombic nectary between the furthest pair of Ifts only or between all but the lowest pair; rachis of pinnae 12-21 cm, the small first posterior Ift inserted +1.5—2 cm from lf-pulvinus, the further paits accrescent, the longest interpinnal segment 5-7,5 cm; iftpulvinules 4.5-6 mm; Ifts elliptic or ovate-elliptic from either broadly or narrowly cuneate, inequilateral base, acutely acuminate, the distal pair 13-23 x 5.5— 8.5 cm, 2.4-3.1 times as Jong as wide; venation pinnate, the subcentric, almost straight midrib giving rise on each side to 6-8 major (and random few intercalary) secondary nerves weakly brochidodrome within the plane margin, the first 1-2 secondaries on posterior side of midrib sometimes a little stronger than succeeding ones but not or scarcely attaining midblade, ail these with the tertiary and openly reticular venules immersed or nearly so above, prominulous beneath.
Peduncles 0-3 cm; axis of spikes 2-2.5 em, at middle +2.5 mm diam, excavate around attachment of each fl] as an elliptic pit; bracts linearoblanceolate 2.5-3.3 mm, deciduous; perianth finely puberulent overall, neither calyx nor corolla striatenerved; calyx campanulate or deeply campanulate 8.5-10 x 44.5 mm, the solid base (a dilated pedicel, as seen in longitudinal section) 0.5-1.2 mm, the orifice irregularly cleft 0.5-2.5 mm, one sinus between the ovate teeth deeper than the rest; corolla 9.5-16 mm, broadly infundibuliform-campanulate, the limb unequally cleft mm deep, appearing spathiform; androecium 90-104-merous, 25-44 mm, the stemonozone 0.8-2 mm, the tube 9-11 mm, a trifle shorter than corolla, the tassel several-seriate; intrastaminal disc lobed, 0.4-0,55 mm; ovary shortly stipitate, at anthesis glabrous or microscopically puberulent.
Pods not seen, described and figured in the protologue from Krukoff 10795," perhaps a mistake for isotypic 10798, this not currently available for study; described as subcylindric, obtuse at both ends, slightly decurved, 18-20 x 3.5 cm, 18-seeded, the plumply discoid seeds stacked contiguously along the cavity, broadside up, mutually compressed (except the conic one at each end of cavity), the papery testa 3-nerved, lacking pleurogram.
In gallery woodland at m, very local in the foothills of the Bolivian Andes, along the valley of Rfo Mapiri and its affluents, prov. La Paz, in latitude +15°20'S between 68° and 68°45°W. — Not mapped. — Fl. IX-XII. The fruit illustrated by Rico to fig. 3) is said to be from Krukoff 10795, but this is a mistake for 10798 (at F).
A taxon starts here.
57.
Zygia inundata (Ducke) H. de Lima ex Bameby & Grimes, comb. nov. inga inundata Ducke, Arch. Jard, Bot, Rio de Janeiro 3: 48.
1922. — "Habitat in ripis inundatis lacus Jeretepaua prope Obidos 13-8-1916, n.
16.340, l[egit] A. Ducke; in insula Cutijuba prope Belém do Pard 29-6-1907, I[egit) J. Huber, n.
8.224; ad rivulos fluvii Amazonum affiuentes prope Gurupé frequens A. Ducke 25-6- 1919 Herb. Iard.
Bot. Rio n.
10.008."
— Syntypi, RB, Syntypus RB 10008, 1B = F Neg. 7/53!, U!. — Pithecolobiwm inundabile Ducke, Acch.
Jard. Bot. Rio de Janeiro 4: 6.
1938, a superfluous substitute for the preceding, the supposed obstacle, Pithecellobium inundatum Martius in Martius & Schrank, Hort. Reg.
Monac.
188.
1829, being a nomen nudum.
Pithecolobium inundabile sensu Ducke, 1949; 39.
Slender srees attaining 8 m, with fuscous, sometimes flaking new branchlets and smooth gray older ones, except for minutely puberulent perianth and nascent foliage glabrous throughout, the lvs simply Paripinnate, almost all amply 4-foliolate, the umbelliform capitula of narrow subtubular fls arising either directly and solitary, or pseudoracemosely, from knots on defoliate branches, or singly from random lf-axils.
Stipules small, caducous.
Lf-stks +5-9.5 cm, the petiole and one interfoliolar segment subequilong; between each pair of Ifts a low-convex fuscous nectary +] mm diam, Ift-pulvinules 3.5-6.5 mm, shallowly grooved ventrally; Ifts subequilaterally elliptic or ovate-elliptic fram cuneately attenuate base, shortly acuminate at apex, the blades of distal pairs 6.5-18 x 2-7 cm, 2,2-3.6 times as long as wide, the proximal pair somewhat smaller, venation pinnate, the subcentric midrib nearly straight, the 8-11 pairs of stronger secondary nerves incurved-ascending, either weakly brochidodrome or expiring shortly within the plane margin, the tertiary venulation weak and faint, immersed or almost so on upper face.
Primary axes of inflorescence 0-2 cm, the peduncles either fasciculate on old wood or solitary and simply bracteate when pseudoracemose, +1.5—4.5 cm; capitula umbelliform, the subglobose receptacle +2 mm diam, to +20-25-fld; pedicels 0.8-2.5 mm, perianth thinly microstrigulose; calyx 1.6-2 mm, minutely denticulate; corolla 9-12 mm, only slightly dilated distally, the erect lobes +0.6-1 mm; androecium 34-48-merous, +16-20 mm, the tube 12-14 mm, the filaments free mm, the intrastaminal disc 0.4-0.5 mm; ovary glabrous, tapering at apex.
Pods sessile, in broad profile oblong +12-14 x 3.34.3 cm, 7-10-seeded, very slightly decurved, compressed but low-biconvex, bluntly bicarinate by 2-ribbed sutures +3 mm wide, the stiffly coriaceous lignescent valves becoming dark brown, smooth or almost so, microscopically puberulent or glabrate; dehiscence through the narrowly gaping sutures; seeds transverse, narrowly imbricate along the continuous cavity, lentiform but thickened, in broad view +2,7-3.5 cm diam, 5-9 mm thick, the testa brown, papery fragile, the embryo homy nigrescent.
In varzea along streams and riverbanks or lake shores below 10 m, locally plentiful along the lower Amazon valley and delta islands in Paré downstream from the mouths of Rios Trombetas and Tapajés (long. 48°-55°30'W) and S Amap4, Brazil; on lower Approuague River near 14°15' N in French Guiana; reported by Ducke (1949; 39) from upper Rio Negro in state of Amazonas. — Not mapped. — FI.
VI-VHIC?.
